国务院新闻办公室6月28日发表《中国与世界贸易组织》白皮书。全文如下：




China's State Council Information Office published a white paper titled "China and the World Trade Organization" on June 28. Following is the full text:



中国与世界贸易组织

（2018年6月）

中华人民共和国国务院新闻办公室




China and the World Trade Organization 

The State Council Information Office of 

the People's Republic of China 

June 2018



目录




Contents



前言




Foreword



一、中国切实履行加入世贸组织承诺




I. China Has Faithfully Fulfilled Its WTO Accession Commitments



二、中国坚定支持多边贸易体制




II. China Firmly Supports the Multilateral Trading System



三、中国加入世贸组织后对世界作出重要贡献




III. China's Significant Contribution to the World After Accession to the WTO



四、中国积极推动更高水平对外开放




IV. China Is Actively Advancing Opening-Up to a Higher Level



结束语




Conclusion



前言




Foreword



1978年，中国开启了改革开放的历史进程。改革开放是中国人民用双手书写的国家和民族发展的壮丽史诗，是中国和世界共同发展进步的伟大历程，不仅深刻改变了中国，也深刻影响了世界。40年来，中国坚持对外开放基本国策，打开国门搞建设，逐步形成了全方位多层次宽领域的对外开放格局，极大促进了中国与外部世界的交流交融，为人类和平与发展的崇高事业作出了重要贡献。




In 1978, China started the historic process of reform and opening-up. This is a glorious chapter in the development epic of the country and the nation composed by the Chinese people, recording the great journey of common progress of China and the rest of the world. It has not only profoundly changed the country, but also greatly influenced the whole world. Over the past 40 years, China has been adhering to the fundamental national policy of reform and opening-up and pursuing development with its door wide open. A model of all-round, multi-level, and wide-ranging opening-up has gradually taken shape. China is closely connected with the outside world and has made a significant contribution to the noble cause of global peace and development.



2001年中国加入世界贸易组织，是中国深度参与经济全球化的里程碑，标志着中国改革开放进入历史新阶段。加入世贸组织以来，中国积极践行自由贸易理念，全面履行加入承诺，大幅开放市场，实现更广互利共赢，在对外开放中展现了大国担当。




In 2001, China acceded to the World Trade Organization (WTO). This was a milestone in China's integration into economic globalization, marking a new historic stage of reform and opening-up. Since its accession to the WTO, China has been a strong advocate for free trade. China has comprehensively fulfilled its commitments to the WTO, substantially opened its market to the world, and delivered mutually beneficial and win-win outcomes on a wider scale. Through these efforts, China has lived up to its responsibility as a major country.



以世贸组织为核心的多边贸易体制是国际贸易的基石，是全球贸易健康有序发展的支柱。中国坚定遵守和维护世贸组织规则，支持开放、透明、包容、非歧视的多边贸易体制，全面参与世贸组织工作，为共同完善全球经济治理发出中国声音、提出中国方案，是多边贸易体制的积极参与者、坚定维护者和重要贡献者。




The multilateral trading system, with the WTO at its core, is the cornerstone of international trade and underpins the sound and orderly development of global trade. China firmly observes and upholds the WTO rules, and supports the multilateral trading system that is open, transparent, inclusive and non-discriminatory. China has participated in all aspects of WTO work, made its voice heard and contributed its own proposals on improving global economic governance. China is an active participant, strong supporter and major contributor in the multilateral trading system. 



中国加入世贸组织既发展了自己，也造福了世界。中国积极践行新发展理念，经济发展由高速度向高质量迈进，成为世界经济增长的主要稳定器和动力源。中国奉行互利共赢的开放战略，积极推动共建“一带一路”，在开放中分享机会和利益，在实现自身发展的同时惠及其他国家和人民，增进了全球福祉，促进了共同繁荣。




Accession to the WTO has boosted China's development and benefited the rest of the world. Propelled by a new vision of development, the Chinese economy is transitioning from rapid growth to high-quality development. China has become a major stabilizer and driving force for the world economy. China stays committed to the strategy of opening-up for win-win results, vigorously promotes the Belt and Road Initiative, and shares opportunities and benefits with other countries and their people while developing China itself, enhancing global wellbeing and common prosperity.



站在新时代的历史起点上，中国开放的大门不会关闭，只会越开越大。中国过去40年的经济发展是在开放条件下取得的，未来中国经济实现高质量发展也将在更加开放条件下进行。中国将继续坚持对外开放基本国策，以更加积极的姿态融入经济全球化进程，实行高水平的贸易和投资自由化便利化政策，与各国构建利益高度融合、彼此相互依存的命运共同体。




At the historic starting point of a new era, China's door of opening-up will not be closed and will only open even wider. Opening-up was key to China's economic growth over the past 40 years. In the same vein, high-quality development of China's economy in the future can only be achieved with greater openness. China will continue adhering to the fundamental national policy of reform and opening-up. China will more proactively embrace economic globalization, adopt policies to promote high-standard liberalization and facilitation of trade and investment, and work together with other countries to build a community of shared future with extensive converging interests and a high degree of interdependence. 



为全面介绍中国履行加入世贸组织承诺的实践，阐释中国参与多边贸易体制建设的原则立场和政策主张，阐明中国推进更高水平对外开放的愿景与行动，中国政府特发表本白皮书。




The Chinese government is publishing this white paper to give a full account of China's fulfillment of its WTO commitments, to explain China's principles, stances, policies, and propositions regarding the multilateral trading system, and to describe China's vision and actions in advancing higher-level reform and opening-up.



一、中国切实履行加入世贸组织承诺




I. China Has Faithfully Fulfilled Its WTO Accession Commitments



2001年中国加入世贸组织①以来，不断完善社会主义市场经济体制，全面加强同多边贸易规则的对接，切实履行货物和服务开放承诺，强化知识产权保护，对外开放政策的稳定性、透明度、可预见性显著提高，为多边贸易体制有效运转作出了积极贡献。




Since China acceded to the World Trade Organization① in 2001, it has made continued efforts to improve its socialist market economy system, further align its policies with multilateral trade rules in all areas, honor its commitments on opening trade in goods and services, and strengthen intellectual property rights (IPR) protection. Remarkable improvements have been made in enhancing the stability, transparency, and predictability of its opening-up policies. China has contributed significantly to the effective operation of the multilateral trading system.



（一）完善社会主义市场经济体制和法律体系




1. Improving the socialist market economy and relevant legal system



始终坚持社会主义市场经济改革方向。加快完善社会主义市场经济体制，健全市场体系，理顺政府和市场关系，使市场在资源配置中起决定性作用，更好发挥政府作用。广泛开展世贸组织规则宣传教育，市场意识、竞争意识、规则意识、法治观念深入人心。




Consistently reforming to develop the socialist market economy. China has accelerated efforts to improve the socialist market economy system and strengthen the market system. This has involved reorganizing the relationship between the government and the market, letting the market play the decisive role in resource allocation and the government play its role better. Education campaigns on WTO rules have been extensively rolled out, raising public awareness of the market, competition, rules and the concept of rule of law.



不断健全社会主义市场经济法律体系。坚持依法治国，全面遵守和执行世贸组织规则，完善基于规则的市场经济法律法规，构建符合多边贸易规则的法律体系。加入世贸组织后，大规模开展法律法规清理修订工作，中央政府清理法律法规和部门规章2300多件，地方政府清理地方性政策法规19万多件，覆盖贸易、投资和知识产权保护等各个方面。2014年，制订进一步加强贸易政策合规工作的政策文件，要求各级政府在拟定贸易政策的过程中，对照世贸组织协定及中国加入承诺进行合规性评估。2016年，建立规范性文件合法性审查机制，进一步清理规范性文件，增强公共政策制定透明度和公众参与度。




Continuously improving the legal system of socialist market economy. Upholding the rule of law, China has faithfully observed and implemented WTO rules, improved its laws and regulations on market economy, and built up a legal system in line with multilateral trade rules. After its accession, China launched major efforts to review and revise relevant laws and regulations, involving 2,300 laws, regulations and departmental rules at central government level, and 190,000 policies and regulations at sub-central government levels, covering trade, investment, IPR protection, etc. In 2014, China issued an official document on furthering trade policy compliance with WTO rules, requiring government at all levels to assess proposed trade policies in accordance with WTO agreements and China's commitments. In 2016, China set up a legality review mechanism to examine normative documents, enhancing the transparency of and public participation in policy development.



（二）履行货物贸易领域开放承诺




2. Fulfilling commitments on trade in goods



大幅降低进口关税。减少进口成本，促进贸易发展，让世界各国更多分享中国经济增长、消费繁荣带来的红利。截至2010年，中国货物降税承诺全部履行完毕，关税总水平由2001年的15.3%降至9.8%。其中，工业品平均税率由14.8%降至8.9%；农产品平均税率由23.2%降至15.2%，约为世界农产品平均关税水平的四分之一，远低于发展中成员56%和发达成员39%的平均关税水平。农产品的最高约束关税为65%，而美国、欧盟、日本分别为440%、408%、1706%。




Substantively reducing import tariffs. By reducing import costs to boost trade, China has shared its development dividend and growing markets with the rest of the world. By 2010, China had fulfilled all of its tariff reduction commitments, reducing the average tariff level from 15.3 percent in 2001 to 9.8 percent. It lowered the average tariff rate of manufactured goods from 14.8 to 8.9 percent. It cut the average tariff rate of agricultural products from 23.2 to 15.2 percent, about one fourth of the global average and far lower than those imposed by the WTO's developing members (56 percent) and developed members (39 percent). China's maximum bound tariff rate of agricultural products is 65 percent, while the corresponding rates of the United States, the European Union and Japan are 440, 408 and 1,706 percent respectively.



显著削减非关税壁垒。减少不必要的贸易限制，促进贸易透明畅通。截至2005年1月，中国已按加入承诺全部取消了进口配额、进口许可证和特定招标等非关税措施，涉及汽车、机电产品、天然橡胶等424个税号产品；对小麦、玉米、大米、食糖、棉花、羊毛、毛条和化肥等关系国计民生的大宗商品实行关税配额管理。




Significantly lowering non-tariff barriers. To increase transparency and facilitate trade, China has reduced unnecessary trade restrictions. By January 2005, in accordance with its commitments, China had eliminated import quotas, import licenses, specific import tendering requirements and other non-tariff measures with regard to 424 items such as automobiles, machinery and electronics products, and natural rubber. It introduced tariff rate quota administration for important bulk commodities, i.e. wheat, corn, rice, sugar, cotton, wool, wool top, and chemical fertilizers.



全面放开外贸经营权。促进经营主体多元化，激发各类企业开展贸易的积极性。自2004年7月起，中国对企业的外贸经营权由审批制改为备案登记制，极大地释放了民营企业的外贸活力，民营企业进出口发展迅速，份额持续扩大，成为对外贸易的重要经营主体。民营企业和外商投资企业进出口占全国进出口总额的比重由2001年的57.5%上升到2017年的83.7%。2017年，作为第一大出口经营主体的民营企业出口占比达46.6%。




Liberalizing the right to trade. To diversify entities and stimulate their enthusiasm to engage in foreign trade, in July 2004 China replaced approval system with registration system for foreign trade authorization, releasing immense vigor of private businesses which has led to a surge of foreign trade in the private sector. With rapid growth and an increasing share of the market, private companies have become important actors in China's foreign trade. In 2017, foreign trade by private companies and foreign-invested enterprises (FIEs) accounted for 83.7 percent of the country's total trade volume, up from 57.5 percent in 2001. In 2017, Chinese private companies, which take the largest share of China's exports, contributed 46.6 percent of all goods and services exported.



（三）履行服务贸易领域开放承诺




3. Fulfilling commitments on trade in services



广泛开放服务市场。大力推动服务业各领域快速发展，提高服务业对国民经济的贡献。在世贸组织分类的12大类服务部门的160个分部门中，中国承诺开放9大类的100个分部门，接近发达成员平均承诺开放108个分部门的水平。截至2007年，中国服务贸易领域开放承诺已全部履行完毕。




Extensively opening up the services market. China has striven to boost the services industry and increase its share of contribution to the economy. Of the 160 services sub-sectors under the 12-sector WTO classification, China committed to opening up 100 sub-sectors under 9 sectors, a level approximate to the average 108 sub-sectors committed by the developed members of the WTO. By 2007, China had honored all of its commitments on trade in services.



持续减少限制措施。逐步降低服务领域外资准入门槛，按期取消服务领域的地域和数量限制，不断扩大允许外资从事服务领域的业务范围。其中，在快递、银行、财产保险等54个服务分部门允许设立外商独资企业，在计算机、环境等23个分部门允许外资控股，在电信、铁路运输、旅游等80个分部门给予外资国民待遇。2010年，中国服务业吸引外商直接投资额首次超过制造业，2017年吸引外商直接投资额占比达到73%。




Continuously reducing restrictions. China has step by step lowered the threshold for foreign investment to enter the services sectors in China, lifted geographical and quantitative restrictions on services according to schedule, and constantly broadened the business scope for foreign investment in the services sectors. China has permitted wholly foreign-owned enterprises in 54 sub-sectors such as courier, banking and property insurance services, allowed foreign majority ownership in 23 sub-sectors such as computer and environment services, and accorded national treatment to foreign capital in 80 sub-sectors such as telecommunication, rail transport, and tourism services. In 2010, foreign direct investment (FDI) flowing into China's services industry surpassed that into manufacturing industry for the first time. In 2017, FDI in the services industry made up 73 percent of all FDI in China.



（四）履行知识产权保护承诺




4. Fulfilling commitments on IPR protection



加强知识产权保护是中国的主动作为。加强知识产权保护是完善产权保护制度最重要的内容，也是提高中国经济竞争力最大的激励。中国推进知识产权保护，不仅符合自身发展需要，也有助于进一步完善法治化、国际化、便利化的营商环境。中国鼓励中外企业开展正常技术交流合作，依法保护在华外资企业合法知识产权，同时，希望外国政府加强对中国知识产权的保护。




Strengthening IPR protection on China's own initiative. Strengthening IPR protection is the centerpiece for improving the property rights protection system, and it would provide the biggest boost to the competitiveness of the Chinese economy. It not only serves China's own development needs, but also helps cultivate a business environment that is law-based, internationalized and business-friendly. China encourages technological exchanges and cooperation between Chinese and foreign enterprises, and protects the lawful IPR owned by foreign enterprises in China. At the same time, we hope foreign governments will also improve protection of Chinese IPR.



构建完备的知识产权保护法律体系。加入世贸组织后，中国建立健全知识产权法律法规，与多个国家建立知识产权工作机制，积极吸收借鉴国际先进立法经验，构建起符合世贸组织规则和中国国情的知识产权法律体系。近年来，修订《商标法》，增加了惩罚性赔偿制度；修订《反不正当竞争法》，进一步完善了商业秘密的保护，同时明确市场混淆行为，引入标识的概念，拓宽对标识的保护范围。目前，正在加快推进《专利法》《著作权法》等法律修订。




Building a full-fledged legal system on IPR protection. Since acceding to the WTO, China has formulated and improved its laws and regulations on IPR protection, set up IPR working mechanisms with many countries, drawn upon advanced international legislative practices, and built an IPR legal system that conforms to WTO rules and suits national conditions of China. The amended Trademark Law sets up a system of punitive damages. The amended Anti-Unfair Competition Law improves the protection of trade secrets, identifies act of confusion, introduces the concept of sign and expands the scope of protection for sign. Currently China is working on amending the Patent Law and the Copyright Law.



持续加强知识产权保护执法力度。强化知识产权保护司法主导作用，把违法成本显著提上去，把法律威慑作用充分发挥出来。重新组建国家知识产权局，完善执法力量，加大执法力度。在北京、上海、广州设立三家知识产权法院，在南京、苏州、武汉、西安等15个中级法院内设立专门审判机构，跨区域管辖专利等知识产权案件。加大行政执法力度，针对重点违法领域，开展专利“护航”行动、打击网络侵权盗版“剑网”行动、出版物版权“扫黄打非”和“秋风”行动、打击侵权假冒的“网剑行动”“质检利剑”打假行动等专项行动，有效保护了知识产权。




Continuously strengthening law enforcement on IPR protection. China has enhanced the dominant role of the judiciary in IPR protection to significantly raise the cost for offenders and fully unlock the deterrent effect of relevant laws. The State Intellectual Property Office has been restructured to strengthen law enforcement. China has set up three IPR courts in Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou, and special judicial organs at 15 intermediate courts in Nanjing, Suzhou, Wuhan, Xi'an and other cities to handle cross-regional IPR cases, including those related to patents. China strengthened administrative law enforcement on intellectual property protection and launched special campaigns targeting outstanding problems, which effectively protected intellectual property rights. Such campaigns include "Convoy Campaign" for protecting patent rights, the "Sword-net Campaign" for combating online infringement and piracy, the "Sweeping Campaign" for cracking down pornography and illegal publication in the copyright field, the "Network Sword Campaign" for combating IPR infringements and counterfeits and the "Sword Actions on Quality Control" for cracking down counterfeits.


知识产权保护效果明显。从2001年起，中国对外支付知识产权费年均增长17%，2017年达到286亿美元。2017年，中国发明专利申请量达到138.2万件，连续7年居世界首位，申请者中近10%为外国单位和个人；国外来华发明专利申请量达到13.6万件，较2001年3.3万件的申请量增长了3倍。世界知识产权组织日前公布，2017年，中国通过《专利合作条约》途径提交的专利申请受理量达5.1万件，仅次于美国，居全球第二位。




Attaining notable results in IPR protection. Since 2001, intellectual property royalties paid by China to foreign right holders has registered an annual growth of 17 percent, reaching USD28.6 billion in 2017. In 2017, China received 1.382 million invention patent applications, ranking the first in the world for the seventh consecutive year. Nearly 10 percent of the applicants were foreign entities and individuals. Invention patent applications filed by foreign entities and individuals in China reached 136,000, growing by threefold compared with 33,000 in 2001. According to the World Intellectual Property Organization, 51,000 patent applications filed from China through the Patent Cooperation Treaty were accepted in 2017, second only to the US.



（五）履行透明度义务




5. Fulfilling commitments on transparency



明确提供法律制度保障。《立法法》《行政法规制定程序条例》《规章制定程序条例》明确要求法律、行政法规和规章草案须按有关规定公开征求公众意见。全国人大常委会法工委定期出版《中华人民共和国法律》（英文版）。国务院法制机构定期出版《中华人民共和国涉外法规汇编》（中英文对照），商务部在《中国对外经济贸易文告》中定期发布贸易政策。




Providing a solid legal basis. The Legislation Law, the Regulations on Procedures for Formulation of Administrative Regulations, and the Regulations on Procedures for Formulation of Rules explicitly provide for the solicitation of public comments on draft laws, administrative regulations and rules. The legislative affairs commission of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress regularly publishes the Laws of the People's Republic of China (English edition); the State Council's legislative affairs organ regularly publishes the Laws and Regulations of the People's Republic of China Governing Foreign-Related Matters (Chinese and English bilingual edition); and the Ministry of Commerce regularly publishes trade policies in China Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation Gazette.



全面履行世贸组织通报义务。中国按照要求定期向世贸组织通报国内相关法律、法规和具体措施的修订调整和实施情况。截至2018年1月，中国提交的通报已达上千份，涉及中央和地方补贴政策、农业、技术法规、标准、合格评定程序、国营贸易、服务贸易、知识产权法律法规等诸多领域。




Comprehensively implementing the WTO notification obligations. China has submitted notifications to the WTO on a regular basis concerning the amendment, revision and implementation of relevant laws, regulations and measures as required by the WTO. By January 2018, China had submitted over one thousand notifications covering areas such as central and sub-central subsidy policies, agriculture, technical regulations, standards, conformity assessment procedures, state trading, trade in services, and IPR laws and regulations.



（六）为履行承诺付出巨大努力




6. Making tremendous efforts to honor its commitments



中国在加入世贸组织时作出广泛而深入的开放承诺，国内企业直接面对国际竞争，多数产业面临较大困难。中国企业主动应对挑战，大力推进产业结构调整，积极参与全球价值链，国际竞争力明显提升。




China made extensive and profound commitments on opening up when entering the WTO. Domestic companies were confronted with international competition, and most industries faced great difficulties. Rising up to these challenges, Chinese companies took the initiative to promote structural readjustment, participated in the global value chains and significantly increased their international competitiveness.



二、中国坚定支持多边贸易体制




II. China Firmly Supports the Multilateral Trading System



以世贸组织为核心的多边贸易体制是国际贸易的基石，为推动全球贸易发展、建设开放型世界经济发挥了中流砥柱作用。加入世贸组织以来，中国始终坚定支持多边贸易体制，全面参与世贸组织各项工作，推动世贸组织更加重视发展中成员的关切，反对单边主义和保护主义，维护多边贸易体制的权威性和有效性，与各成员共同推动世贸组织在经济全球化进程中发挥更大作用。




The multilateral trading system with the WTO at its core is the cornerstone of international trade, and has been playing a pivotal role in promoting global trade and building an open world economy. Since its accession to the WTO, China has firmly supported the multilateral trading system, participated in all aspects of WTO work. It called upon the WTO to focus more on the concerns of developing members, opposed unilateralism and protectionism, upheld the authority and efficacy of the multilateral trading system, and made concerted efforts with other members in supporting the WTO to play a greater role in economic globalization.



（一）积极推进贸易投资自由化便利化




Liberalizing and facilitating trade and investment 



全面参与多哈回合各项议题谈判。中国提出和联署谈判建议百份以上，推动贸易便利化、农业出口竞争等多项议题达成协议，推动多边贸易体制不断完善。2015年，中国成为接受《贸易便利化协定》议定书的第16个世贸组织成员。2016年中国担任二十国集团主席国期间，推动多国完成《贸易便利化协定》的国内批准程序，为协定早日生效作出了积极贡献。




Participating fully in the Doha Round negotiations. China has submitted or co-sponsored more than 100 negotiation proposals, helped secure agreement on trade facilitation and export competition in agricultural products, and promoted the continuous improvement of the multilateral trading system. In 2015, China became the 16th WTO member to ratify the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA). During its G20 presidency in 2016, China encouraged a number of countries to complete their domestic ratification procedures of the TFA, prompting the agreement's entry into effect at an early date.



积极推动诸边贸易自由化进程。作为发展中成员，中国积极参与诸边自由化倡议，并为谈判作出了重要贡献。中国在加入世贸组织时参加了《信息技术协定》，在此基础上深入参与该协定扩围谈判，推动各方就取消201项信息技术产品的关税达成协议。中国是《环境产品协定》谈判的发起方之一，始终以积极建设性态度参与磋商，在二十国集团领导人杭州峰会期间推动谈判达成重要共识。中国于2007年启动加入《政府采购协定》谈判，为加入该协定作出了积极努力。




Promoting plurilateral trade liberalization. As a developing country, China has actively participated in plurilateral liberalization initiatives and made important contributions to relevant talks. It accepted the Information Technology Agreement (ITA) upon accession, subsequently participated in the negotiations to expand its coverage, and encouraged relevant parties to reach agreement on eliminating tariffs of 201 information technology products. As one of the initiators of the negotiations on the Environment Goods Agreement, China always participated in relevant discussions in a constructive manner, and contributed to the important consensus reached at the G20 Summit in Hangzhou. In 2007, China started the negotiation on its accession to the Agreement on Government Procurement and has been making great efforts ever since. 



有力促进世贸组织新议题讨论。中国推动世贸组织积极回应投资便利化、中小微企业、电子商务等世贸组织成员普遍关注的新议题并开展相关讨论。发起成立“投资便利化之友”，引导70多个成员达成《关于投资便利化的部长联合声明》。加入“中小微企业之友”，推介中国在世贸组织相关提案中关于支持中小微企业的内容。加入“电子商务发展之友”，积极推动世贸组织电子商务议题多边讨论，分享经验做法，帮助发展中成员从发展电子商务中受益。




Mobilizing support for discussing new issues in the WTO. China has encouraged the WTO to respond to and discuss new topics of general interest to the members such as investment facilitation, micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), and e-commerce. China initiated "Friends of Investment Facilitation for Development (FIFD)" and sponsored the Joint Ministerial Statement on Investment Facilitation for Development signed by over 70 members. China joined the "Friends of Micro, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises", and shared with other members its proposals that support MSMEs. As an advocate of multilateral discussions on e-commerce in the WTO, China joined "Friends of E-commerce for Development (FED)", shared its experiences and helped other developing members benefit from e-commerce.



切实履行《贸易便利化协定》。作为发展中成员，中国积极推动实施《贸易便利化协定》。中国组建了国家贸易便利化委员会，各有关部门通力协作，提高贸易便利化水平。截至2017年，各省（自治区、直辖市）已经建立了贸易便利化工作联席会议制度，积极做好本地区贸易便利化相关工作。在履行该协定方面，中国的A类措施（协定生效后立即实施）所占比重达到94.5%，目前仅保留4项B类措施（协定生效后经过一定过渡期后实施）。中国将严格履行承诺，在3年过渡期后如期实施B类措施。




Faithfully implementing the Trade Facilitation Agreement. As a developing member, China has actively promoted the implementation of TFA. It has set up the National Committee on Trade Facilitation to coordinate the efforts of relevant government agencies to enhance trade facilitation. By 2017, China's provinces (as well as autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the central government) had all established a joint committee mechanism for trade facilitation in their respective jurisdictions. Regarding China's TFA commitments, 94.5 percent of all commitments fall into Category A (immediately implemented upon entry into force of the TFA), and only four items belong to Category B (implemented after a transitional period following the TFA's entry into force). China will honor its promise and implement all the Category B measures following a transitional period of three years after entry into force of the Agreement.



（二）有效维护争端解决机制法律地位




2. Safeguarding the dispute settlement mechanism



积极维护争端解决机制有效运转。世贸组织争端解决机制为保障国际贸易可预见性、维护多边贸易体制稳定发挥了重要作用。中国积极参与改进争端解决程序的谈判，支持世贸组织上诉机构独立公正开展上诉审议工作。针对当前个别世贸组织成员阻挠上诉机构成员遴选，中国与60多个成员联署提案，努力推动尽快启动遴选程序。




Safeguarding the effective operation of the dispute settlement mechanism. The WTO dispute settlement mechanism has played a vital role in maintaining the predictability of international trade and the stability of the multilateral trading system. China has actively participated in the negotiations on improving the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes and supports the independence and impartiality of the WTO Appellate Body. Despite the attempt of certain WTO member to obstruct the appointment of members of the Appellate Body, China joined more than 60 members in submitting a proposal on starting the selection process at the earliest possible date.



妥善处理与其他成员的贸易纠纷。中国主张通过世贸组织争端解决机制妥善解决贸易争端。按照事项统计，截至2018年4月，中国在世贸组织起诉案件17项，已结案8项；被诉案件27项，已结案23项。中国通过主动起诉，遏制了少数世贸组织成员的不公正做法，维护了自身贸易利益和世贸规则权威。中国积极应对被诉案件，尊重并认真执行世贸组织裁决，作出了符合世贸规则的调整，无一例被起诉方申请报复的情况。




Properly handling trade disputes with other WTO members. China supports WTO members to solve their trade disputes within the WTO dispute settlement mechanism. By April 2018, China had brought 17 disputes to the WTO, of which 8 had been concluded. Meanwhile, China had been complained against in 27 disputes, of which 23 had been concluded. By lodging complaints in the WTO, China redressed other members' violation of obligations under the covered agreements, and defended its own trade interests as well as the authority of WTO rules. China also actively defended the cases against it, respected the WTO rulings, and made adjustments to its measures according to WTO rules. Up to now, none of the complainants has requested for retaliation against China.



（三）深度参与贸易政策审议




3. Fully participating in trade policy review



认真接受成员的贸易政策监督。世贸组织贸易政策审议机制有助于增加多边贸易体制的透明度。中国高度重视贸易政策审议，已接受世贸组织六次审议，并正在积极准备即将于2018年7月进行的世贸组织对中国的第七次贸易政策审议。中国始终以开放坦诚的姿态，介绍宏观经济和贸易投资政策发展情况，听取其他成员对中国改革开放的意见和建议。世贸组织成员赞赏中国参与审议的态度，认为中国履约、合规、开放的良好形象为发挥审议机制作用树立了典范。




Attaching great importance to trade policy monitoring by other WTO members. The WTO trade policy review (TPR) mechanism is effective in enhancing the transparency of the multilateral trading system. China places great emphasis on the TPR process. Having undergone six TPRs on itself, China is preparing for the seventh one in July 2018. In an open and frank manner, China has briefed the WTO membership on its macro-economic, trade and investment policies, and listened attentively to their comments and suggestions on China's reform and opening-up. Other WTO members applaud China's active participation and regard China as an impressive example in reinforcing the role of TPR in monitoring commitments, ensuring compliance and enhancing openness.



敦促其他成员遵守多边贸易协定。加入世贸组织以来，中国参与世贸组织对其他成员审议近300次，向被审议成员提交书面问题和贸易关注数千项，敦促其他成员遵守世贸组织规则和有关承诺，为维护和强化审议机制功能发挥了积极作用。




Urging other WTO members to abide by multilateral trade agreements. Since its accession to the WTO, China has participated in nearly 300 TPRs on other members. It raised thousands of written questions and trade concerns to the members under review, urged them to abide by the WTO rules and their commitments, and played a positive role in safeguarding and strengthening the TPR mechanism.



（四）全力支持发展中国家融入多边贸易体制




4. Vigorously supporting the integration of developing members into the multilateral trading system



支持世贸组织将发展作为工作重心。确保发展中国家尤其是最不发达国家从国际贸易中获益，进而实现经济增长是世贸组织宗旨之一。作为世界上最大的发展中国家，中国对发展中成员在参与全球价值链分工、参与国际经贸治理等方面面临的困难表示关切，努力推动贸易为实现2030年可持续发展议程作出积极贡献。




Supporting the WTO to focus on development. An important objective of the WTO is to ensure that developing members, especially least-developed country members, benefit from international trade and boost their economic growth. As the largest developing country, China understands the difficulties of developing members to benefit from the global value chains and participate in international economic and trade governance. China worked hard to make trade an enabler of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.



向其他发展中成员提供务实有效的支持。加大对发展中成员特别是最不发达国家成员援助力度，促进缩小南北发展差距。截至2018年3月，已对36个建交且已完成换文手续的最不发达国家97%税目产品实施零关税。积极响应世贸组织“促贸援助”倡议，利用多双边援助资源帮助其他发展中成员特别是最不发达国家成员加强基础设施建设、培训经贸人员、提高生产能力、发展贸易投资。向世贸组织“贸易便利化协定基金”捐款100万美元，协助落实《贸易便利化协定》。2011年，中国设立“最不发达国家及加入世贸组织中国项目”，已帮助6个最不发达国家加入世贸组织。2017年起，中国在南南合作援助基金项下与世贸组织等国际组织加强合作，在“促贸援助”领域实施合作项目，帮助其他发展中成员提高从全球价值链中获益的能力。




Providing pragmatic and effective support to other developing members. China has reinforced its aid to other developing members, especially least-developed country members, to bridge the South-North development gap. By March 2018, it had accorded zero tariff treatment on 97 percent of all tariff lines to 36 least-developed countries (LDCs) that have diplomatic relations with China and completed exchange of notes. Responding to the "Aid for Trade" initiative, China has contributed multilateral and bilateral resources to help other developing members, especially least-developed country members, with infrastructure construction, professionals training, productivity improvement, as well as trade and investment development. It has donated USD1 million to the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement Facility to assist the implementation of the TFA. The LDCs and Accessions Program, established by China in 2011, has helped six LDCs accede to the WTO. Since 2017, China has strengthened cooperation with the WTO and other international organizations under the South-South Cooperation Assistance Fund, and carried out cooperative projects in "Aid for Trade" to help other developing members benefit from global value chains.



（五）坚决反对单边主义和保护主义




5. Firmly opposing unilateralism and protectionism



单边主义和保护主义与世贸组织基本原则背道而驰。多边贸易体制是顺应世界经济发展的历史选择。世贸组织倡导以规则为基础，秉持开放、透明、包容、非歧视等基本原则，其解决全球贸易问题主渠道的地位不会改变。中国旗帜鲜明反对单边主义和保护主义。搞单边主义不符合市场规律，不符合国际规则，最终必然损人害己。搞保护主义如同把自己关进黑屋子，看似躲过了风吹雨打，但也隔绝了阳光和空气。只有坚持平等协商、携手合作，才能实现共赢、多赢。




Unilateralism and protectionism run counter to the fundamental principles of the WTO. The multilateral trading system is a historic choice that follows the trend of global economic development. The WTO advocates the principles of rules, openness, transparency, inclusiveness and non-discrimination, and it will remain the main channel to address global trade issues. China explicitly opposes unilateralism and protectionism. Unilateralism goes against the law of the market and international rules, causes injury to others but ends up defeating oneself. Pursuing protectionism is like locking oneself in a dark room. While wind and rain may be kept outside, that dark room will also block light and air. Only through equal consultation and joint efforts can win-win results be achieved for all.



利用多边合作平台倡导自由贸易。中国倡导通过加强合作、平等对话和协商谈判来解决国际贸易中的问题。中国主办亚太经合组织第二十二次领导人非正式会议、二十国集团领导人杭州峰会、金砖国家领导人第九次会晤期间，加强与各方协调，推动将反对贸易保护主义写入会议成果文件。中国领导人出席“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛、博鳌亚洲论坛、世界经济论坛等多边会议期间，多次阐明支持多边贸易体制、推动建设开放型世界经济的坚定立场。在世贸组织内中国积极倡议，与多数成员发出反对单边主义和保护主义的共同声音。




Pursuing free trade through platforms for multilateral cooperation. China advocates solving international trade problems through cooperation, dialogue and consultation on an equal footing. During the 22nd APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting, the G20 Hangzhou Summit, and the BRICS Xiamen Summit, all hosted by China, the country increased coordination with all parties concerned, and secured statements on opposing trade protectionism in the outcome documents of these summits. When attending the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, the Boao Forum for Asia, and the World Economic Forum, Chinese leaders repeatedly expressed their firm support for the multilateral trading system and an open world economy. In the WTO, the vast majority of members echoed China's opposition to unilateralism and protectionism.



三、中国加入世贸组织后对世界作出重要贡献




III. China's Significant Contribution to the World After Accession to the WTO



中国坚定不移奉行互利共赢的对外开放战略，遵循世贸组织自由贸易理念，在对外开放中展现大国担当。从加入世贸组织到共建“一带一路”，中国开放胸襟、拥抱世界，为促进世界经济贸易发展、增加全球民众福祉作出了重大贡献，成为世界经济的主要稳定器和动力源。




China steadfastly pursues a mutually beneficial opening-up strategy, upholds the WTO's principle of free trade, and has lived up to its responsibilities as a major country in the process of opening-up. From its WTO accession in 2001 to the Belt and Road Initiative in 2013, China has embraced the world with open arms, made a significant contribution to promoting international trade and increasing global wellbeing, and become a key anchor and driver for the world economy. 



（一）拉动世界经济复苏和增长




1. Boosting world economic recovery and growth



加入世贸组织后，中国改革开放和经济发展进入加速期，中国的发展有力促进了世界经济发展。




Since its accession to the WTO, China has accelerated its reform and opening-up process and economic growth. China's development is a forceful driver of global economic growth. 



2016年，按照汇率法计算，中国国内生产总值占世界的比重达到14.8%，较2001年提高10.7个百分点。自2002年以来，中国对世界经济增长的平均贡献率接近30%，是拉动世界经济复苏和增长的重要引擎。




In 2016, China's GDP accounted for 14.8 percent of the world total, up by 10.7 percentage points over 2001, calculated at exchange rates. Since 2002, China's contribution to global economic growth has approached 30 percent on average. The Chinese economy has become a major engine for global economic recovery and growth. 



中国新型工业化、信息化、城镇化、农业现代化快速推进，形成巨大的消费和投资空间，为全球创造了更多就业。根据国际劳工组织发布的首份《中国与拉美和加勒比地区经贸关系报告》，1990－2016年，中国为拉美和加勒比地区创造了180万个就业岗位。




China has quickened its pace in promoting new industrialization, IT application, urbanization, and agricultural modernization, created enormous opportunities for consumption and investment, and generated more jobs for the world. According to a report released by the International Labor Organization, "Effects of China on the Quantity and Quality of Jobs in Latin America and the Caribbean", China created 1.8 million jobs for Latin America and the Caribbean region from 1990 to 2016. 



中国的快速发展为全球减贫事业作出了巨大贡献。改革开放40年来，中国人民生活从短缺走向充裕、从贫困走向小康，现行联合国标准下的7亿多贫困人口成功脱贫，占同期全球减贫人口总数70%以上，为世界提供了最高的减贫贡献率。




China's rapid development has made tremendous contributions to the cause of global poverty reduction. Over the past 40 years of reform and opening-up, the Chinese people have emerged from scarcity to abundance and from poverty to moderate prosperity. According to current UN standards, more than 700 million Chinese people have been lifted out of poverty, accounting for more than 70% of the global total over the same period. This represents the largest contribution to poverty reduction in the world. 



（二）对外贸易发展惠及全球




2. Foreign trade development benefiting the world



加入世贸组织以来，中国对外贸易持续发展，惠及13亿多中国人民，也惠及世界各国人民。




Since China's entry into the WTO, China's foreign trade has maintained sustained development, benefiting more than 1.3 billion Chinese and other peoples across the world. 



面对国际金融危机等前所未有的困难和挑战，中国采取有效措施积极应对，努力促进对外贸易回稳向好。世贸组织数据显示，2017年，中国在全球货物贸易进口和出口总额中所占比重分别达到10.2%和12.8%，是120多个国家和地区的主要贸易伙伴。中国货物贸易出口为全球企业和民众提供了物美价优的商品；2001－2017年，中国货物贸易进口额年均增长13.5%，高出全球平均水平6.9个百分点，已成为全球第二大进口国。自2009年以来，中国一直是最不发达国家第一大出口市场，吸收了最不发达国家五分之一的出口。




Confronted with unprecedented difficulties and challenges including the global financial crisis in 2008, China has taken effective measures to stabilize and revitalize its foreign trade. According to WTO statistics, China's imports accounted for 10.2 percent of the world total merchandise import in 2017, and its exports 12.8 percent, making China a major trade partner of more than 120 countries and regions. China's exports have provided high-quality and inexpensive products to businesses and people around the world. From 2001 to 2017, China's imports increased by an annual average of 13.5 percent, 6.9 percentage points higher than the global average; and China has become the world's second largest importer. Since 2009, China has been the largest export market for the LDCs, and absorbed 20 percent of their exports. 



2001－2017年，中国服务贸易进口从393亿美元增至4676亿美元，年均增长16.7%，占全球服务贸易进口总额的比重接近10%。自2013年起，中国成为全球第二大服务贸易进口国，为带动出口国当地消费、增加就业、促进经济增长作出了重要贡献。以旅游服务为例，中国连续多年保持世界第一大出境旅游客源国地位。2017年，中国公民出境旅游突破1.3亿人次，境外旅游消费达1152.9亿美元。




China's services imports increased from USD39.3 billion in 2001 to USD467.6 billion in 2017, up by an annual average of 16.7 percent, and accounting for nearly 10 percent of the world total. Since 2013, China has been the world's second largest service importer, making significant contributions to stimulating consumption, creating jobs and boosting economic growth in the exporting countries. Taking tourism services as an example, China has been the world's largest source of outbound tourists for many years in a row. In 2017, outbound tourist trips made by Chinese citizens exceeded 130 million person-times, generating USD115.29 billion of overseas tourism spending. 



中国贸易模式的创新也为世界贸易的增长带来了新的动力。跨境电商等对外贸易新业态新模式快速发展，为贸易伙伴提供了更加广阔的市场。2017年中国海关验放的跨境电子商务进出口商品总额为902.4亿元人民币，同比增长80.6%，其中进口为565.9亿元人民币，同比增长高达120%。




China's innovation in trade models has also given new impetus to world trade growth. Cross-border e-commerce and other new types and modes of foreign trade have flourished in China, providing an ever-expanding market to its trading partners. In 2017, the value of imported and exported goods in cross-border e-commerce checked and released by China Customs totaled RMB90.24 billion, up by 80.6 percent on yearly basis, of which imports stood at RMB56.59 billion, up by 120 percent compared with the previous year. 



（三）双向投资造福世界各国




3. Two-way investment benefiting all countries



中国推动构建公正、合理、透明的国际经贸投资规则体系，促进生产要素有序流动、资源高效配置、市场深度融合。




China has been promoting the establishment of a fair, equitable and transparent system of international trade and investment rules to boost the orderly flow of production factors, efficient resources allocation and full market integration. 



中国积极吸引外国机构和个人来华投资兴业，外商直接投资规模从1992年起连续26年居发展中国家首位。加入世贸组织后，外商直接投资规模从2001年的468.8亿美元增加到2017年的1363.2亿美元，年均增长6.9%。外商投资企业在提升中国经济增长质量和效益的同时，分享中国经济发展红利。中国美国商会《2018中国商务环境调查报告》显示，约60%的受访企业将中国列为全球三大投资目的地之一，74%的会员企业计划于2018年扩大在华投资，这一比例为近年来最高，其中三分之一的受访企业计划增加在华投资10%以上。中国欧盟商会《商业信心调查2018》报告显示，超过一半的会员企业计划扩大在华运营规模。2017年全国新设立外商投资企业35652家，同比增长27.8%。




China has proactively attracted foreign institutions and individuals to invest and develop in China. Since 1992, China has consistently topped the list of FDI recipients among developing countries for 26 years consecutively. After China's accession to the WTO, its FDI increased from USD46.88 billion in 2001 to USD136.32 billion in 2017, up by an annual average of 6.9 percent. FIEs have shared the benefits of China's economic development, while helping improve the quality and performance of China's economy. According to the "2018 China Business Climate Survey Report" by the American Chamber of Commerce in China (AmCham China), nearly 60 percent of the interviewed enterprises ranked China as a top three investment priority; some 74 percent of the AmCham China member enterprises plan to expand their investments in China in 2018, the highest in recent years, and one third of the interviewed enterprises plan to increase their investments in China by over 10 percent. According to the "Business Confidence Survey 2018" by the European Union Chamber of Commerce in China, more than half of its member enterprises plan to expand their presence in China. In 2017, newly founded FIEs in China reached 35,652, registering an increase of 27.8 percent. 



中国对外投资合作持续健康规范发展，对外直接投资年度流量全球排名从加入世贸组织之初的第26位上升至2017年的第3位。中国对外投资合作加快了东道国当地技术进步步伐，促进其经济发展和民生改善，创造了大量就业机会。




China's outward investment cooperation has developed in a sustained, sound, and orderly way. In terms of annual flow of outward direct investment (ODI), China's world ranking rose from the 26th place after its accession to the WTO to the third in 2017. China's outward investment cooperation has accelerated technological progress in the host countries, advanced their economic development, improved their people's well-being and created many jobs. 



（四）为全球提供公共产品




4. Providing public goods to the world



中国的发展得益于国际社会，也愿为国际社会提供更多公共产品。中国致力于打造开放型合作平台，维护和发展开放型世界经济，与其他国家共同构建广泛的利益共同体。




China receives support from the international community in its own development process and stands ready to provide more public goods to the world. China is committed to building an open platform of cooperation, upholding and growing an open world economy, and working together with other countries to build a broad community of shared interests. 



提出共建“一带一路”倡议。面对世界经济发展困境，中国提出共建“一带一路”倡议。“一带一路”倡议源于中国，但机会和成果属于世界，对于促进各个国家和地区之间深化合作和共同发展，维护和发展开放型世界经济，推动开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的经济全球化，推动构建人类命运共同体发挥着重要作用。




Proposing the Belt and Road Initiative. In the face of difficulties in world economic development, China put forward the Belt and Road Initiative in 2013. While the proposal was initiated by China, the opportunities and achievements belong to the world. The Belt and Road Initiative plays an important role in promoting in-depth cooperation and common development between countries and regions, upholding and growing an open world economy, making economic globalization open, inclusive, balanced, win-win and beneficial to all and advancing the building of a community with a shared future for mankind.



共建“一带一路”倡议提出以来，已有80多个国家和国际组织同中国签署了合作协议。中国与相关国家深化务实合作，取得了丰硕成果。2013－2017年，中国同沿线国家贸易总额超过5万亿美元，中国企业在这些国家累计投资超过700亿美元。截至2017年底，中国企业在有关国家建设75个境外经贸合作区，上缴东道国税费超过16亿美元，为当地创造了22万个就业岗位。自2018年起，中国将在3年内向参与“一带一路”建设的发展中国家和国际组织提供600亿元人民币援助，建设更多民生项目。




Since 2013, more than 80 countries and international organizations have signed cooperation agreements with China. The in-depth and practical cooperation between China and relevant countries has achieved fruitful results. From 2013 to 2017, the total value of China's trade with other Belt and Road countries exceeded USD5 trillion, and total investment by Chinese enterprises in these countries exceeded USD70 billion. By the end of 2017, Chinese enterprises had set up 75 overseas economic and trade cooperation zones in relevant countries, contributed more than USD1.6 billion taxes to the host countries and created 220,000 local jobs. Within three years starting from 2018, China will provide RMB60 billion worth of aid to the developing countries and international organizations participating in the Belt and Road Initiative, with a view to developing more projects to improve people's lives. 



举办中国国际进口博览会。中国国际进口博览会是中国发起的、多个国际组织和100多个国家参与的国际博览会，是推动全球包容互惠发展的国际公共产品。首届中国国际进口博览会将于2018年11月举行。举办进口博览会是中国推进新一轮高水平对外开放的重大决策，是中国主动向世界开放市场的重大举措，是中国支持经济全球化和贸易自由化的实际行动。未来15年，中国预计将进口24万亿美元商品。中国国际进口博览会将为各国出口提供新机遇，为各国共享中国发展红利搭建新平台，为世界经济增长注入新动力。




Hosting the China International Import Expo. Initiated by China, the China International Import Expo (CIIE) will bring together multiple international organizations and more than 100 countries. It is an international public product that promotes inclusive and mutually beneficial development around the globe. The inaugural session of CIIE will be held in November 2018. Hosting the CIIE is an important decision made by China to promote a new round of high-level opening-up, a major policy measure of China to further open its market to the world, and a concrete action by China to support economic globalization and trade liberalization. In the coming 15 years, China is expected to import USD24 trillion worth of goods. The CIIE will provide new export opportunities for the world, build a new platform for other countries and regions to share China's development dividends, and bring more dynamism to world economic growth. 



四、中国积极推动更高水平对外开放




IV. China Is Actively Advancing Opening-Up to a Higher Level



中国的对外开放不会止步于履行加入世贸组织承诺。面对汹涌澎湃但又充满曲折的经济全球化，中国顺应时代发展潮流和世界发展大势，坚定不移扩大对外开放，不断创造更全面、更深入、更多元的对外开放格局，实现更广泛的互利共赢。




Fulfilling China's WTO commitments has never been the end point of its opening-up. In the face of the overwhelming trend of economic globalization and its winding path, China keeps pace with the times, takes firm steps to expand opening-up, and makes continuous efforts to open up in a more comprehensive, profound and diversified way, with a view to achieving greater mutual benefit and win-win outcomes.



（一）促进贸易平衡发展




1. Promoting balanced development of trade



中国的贸易战略宗旨是互利共赢、多元平衡。中国注重提升出口质量和附加值，积极扩大进口，更好融入全球价值链。中国不刻意追求货物贸易顺差，客观看待目前服务贸易存在的逆差，支持有利于丰富市场供给、有利于提升人民生活品质、有利于促进产业结构升级的进口。在全面履行加入承诺的基础上，中国近年来又多次以暂定税率方式大幅自主降低进口关税税率。根据世贸组织统计，2015年中国的贸易加权平均关税已降至4.4%，与美国、欧盟等发达经济体相差1.5－2个百分点。截至2017年底，已调减900多个税目产品的税率。在博鳌亚洲论坛2018年年会上，中国宣布将进一步扩大降税范围，努力增加人民群众需求比较集中的特色优势产品进口。




China pursues a trade strategy of mutual benefit, win-win, diversification and balanced development. It endeavors to raise the quality and added-value of its exports, proactively increase imports, and better integrate into the global value chains. China never deliberately pursues trade surplus in goods. At the same time, China takes an objective view towards existing trade deficit in services. The country always welcomes imports that diversify market supply, improve people's quality of life, and upgrade its industrial structure. In recent years, on top of its commitments to the WTO, China has self-initiated significant reductions to import tariffs on an interim basis for multiple times. According to the WTO, China's trade-weighted average import tariff rate had fallen to 4.4 percent in 2015, only 1.5 to 2 percentage points higher than those of developed economies such as the US and the EU. By the end of 2017, China had reduced tariffs on more than 900 tariff lines. At the 2018 Boao Forum for Asia Annual Conference, China announced plans to further reduce import tariffs and to import more high-quality, distinctive products that meet the strong demand of the Chinese people.



（二）提高贸易便利化水平




2. Facilitating international trade



世贸组织《贸易便利化协定》实施一年多以来，中国贸易便利化水平显著提升。目前，中国海关进口货物平均通关时间缩短至20小时以内，出口货物平均通关时间不到2小时。中国加快推进国际贸易“单一窗口”建设和推广。截至2017年底，中国国际贸易“单一窗口”已与11个口岸管理相关部门对接，基本覆盖大通关主要流程，实现企业一点接入、一次提交、一次查验、一键跟踪、一站办理，加速了口岸治理体系现代化建设进程。中国将继续优化监管方式方法，改革口岸管理体制，进一步压缩进出口环节和成本，不断优化口岸营商环境。




China's efforts to implement the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement, which entered into force in February 2017, have resulted in impressive improvement in China's trade facilitation. The average time for customs clearance has been reduced to less than 20 hours for imports and less than two hours for exports. China has accelerated the establishment of a single window for international trade. By the end of 2017, the China International Trade Single Window had been connected to 11 authorities and agencies responsible for border control and covered basically all major import and export procedures. This one-stop system enables traders to use a single entry point to declare freight and taxes with a single submission of documents, and track the results after a single joint inspection by the participating authorities. It has accelerated the modernization of China's port management. China will further optimize supervision and management approaches, reform port administration regime and streamline procedures and reduce costs for import and export, to create a more business-friendly environment at the port.



（三）大幅放宽外商投资准入




3. Substantially widening market access for foreign investment



对外商投资实行准入前国民待遇加负面清单管理模式，是中国适应经济全球化新形势和国际投资规则变化的制度变革。2016年9月，全国人大常委会对《外资企业法》等4部法律进行了修订，将不涉及国家规定实施准入特别管理措施的外商投资企业设立及变更事项，由审批改为备案管理。2018年上半年，中国完成修订外商投资负面清单工作，出台《国务院关于积极有效利用外资推动经济高质量发展若干措施的通知》，进一步大幅度放宽市场准入，包括稳步扩大金融业开放，持续推进服务业开放，深化农业、采矿业、制造业开放。




China has adopted a foreign investment administration model of pre-establishment national treatment plus negative list. This move marks an institutional reform in response to new developments in economic globalization and changes in international rules for investment. In September 2016, the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress amended four laws including the Law on Foreign Invested Enterprises. For those foreign-invested enterprises not subject to the special administrative measures on access to foreign investment (the negative list), their establishment and changes are now administered by a "filing for record" approach instead of the examination and approval system. In the first half of 2018, revision of the negative list for foreign investment was completed and the "Notice of the State Council on Measures for Using Foreign Investment Actively and Effectively to Promote High-Quality Economic Development" was issued to further widen market access considerably. China is making efforts to steadily liberalize its financial sector, constantly open up the services industry, and deepen the opening-up of agricultural, mining and manufacturing sectors.



对于船舶行业，中国将于2018年取消外资股比限制，包括设计、制造、修理各环节。对于飞机制造行业，中国将取消外资股比限制，包括干线飞机、支线飞机、通用飞机、直升机、无人机、浮空器等。对于汽车行业，中国将取消专用车、新能源汽车外资股比限制，并将在未来5年内逐步取消汽车行业的全部股比限制。




As regards the shipbuilding industry, China will lift foreign equity caps for companies engaged in the design, manufacturing and repair of vessels in 2018. Moreover, China will lift foreign equity caps on airplane manufacturing of trunk airliners, regional jets, utility aircrafts, helicopters, drones and lighter-than-air aircrafts. In the automobile industry, China will remove foreign equity caps on manufacturing of special-purpose vehicles and new-energy vehicles, and phase out those on all automotive ventures over the next five years.



（四）创造更有吸引力的投资环境




4. Creating a more attractive environment for foreign investment



中国积极营造宽松有序的投资环境，放宽外商投资准入，进一步简化外资准入管理程序，建设高标准自由贸易试验区，加强投资促进与投资保护，进一步提升外商投资环境法治化、国际化、便利化水平，让中国市场更加透明、更加规范，促进外资增长，提高利用外资质量。




China makes efforts to create a favorable and orderly investment environment, ease market access for foreign investment, further simplify the administrative procedures on access to foreign investment, build pilot free-trade zones (FTZs) with high standards, and better promote and protect foreign investment. China works to improve an investment climate that conforms to international rules, facilitates foreign investment and is based on the rule of law, and to make its market more transparent and better regulated. These efforts will help attract more foreign investment into China and ensure its effective utilization.



截至2018年3月，中国全面取消非行政许可审批，与2013年3月相比，削减行政审批事项44%。中央政府层面核准的企业投资项目数量累计减少90%。全面改革工商登记、注册资本等商事制度，全面推行注册资本认缴登记制，工商登记前置审批事项压缩了87%，企业开办时间缩短三分之一以上。推进市场准入负面清单制度改革，推行“法无禁止即可为”，切实增强执法公正性，减轻企业负担。




By March 2018, all items for non-administrative license approval had been cancelled, and items for administrative approval had decreased by 44 percent as compared to March 2013. The number of investment projects by enterprises subject to verification of the central government had been reduced by 90 percent. China has comprehensively reformed its systems for business registration and registered capital, rolled out the subscribed capital registration system, and revoked 87 percent of the items subject to examination and approval preceding the industrial and commercial registration. The time for business establishment has been shortened by at least one third. In order to alleviate the burden on businesses, China is advancing the reform of the negative list for market access, promoting the concept of "everything that is not forbidden is allowed", and reinforcing the impartiality of law enforcement.



中国将继续推进简政、降税、减费改革，继续加强同国际经贸规则对接，增强透明度，强化产权保护，坚持依法办事、鼓励竞争、反对垄断。加快制定出台《外国投资法》，构建符合新时代改革开放需要的外资法律体系，推进更高水平的对外开放和更深层次的外资管理体系改革，保护外商投资和外国投资者合法权益。降低外国人才来华就业、创业门槛。提升各类开发区发展水平，高标准高质量建设自由贸易试验区，探索建设中国特色自由贸易港。




China will continue with the reform to streamline administration, lower taxes, and reduce fees. China will further align its business environment with international economic and trade rules, enhance policy transparency, strengthen the protection of property rights, advance the rule of law, encourage competition and oppose monopoly. The enactment of the Law on Foreign Investment will be expedited to build a legal system for foreign investment that meets the needs of reform and opening-up in the new era, elevate opening-up to a higher level, push for deeper reform in the foreign investment administration system, and protect the legitimate rights and interests of foreign investment and foreign investors. The threshold will be lowered for foreign talents to work and start their own businesses in China. In addition, China will improve various development zones, build the pilot FTZs with high standard and good quality, and explore the construction of free-trade ports with Chinese characteristics.



（五）规范引导企业对外投资




5. Regulating outward investment



中国政府积极引导企业在海外守法经营、履行企业社会责任，支持企业按照商业原则和国际惯例开展对外投资合作。中国将继续积极推动境外投资持续合理有序健康发展，有效防范各类风险，同时，中国呼吁东道国避免滥用安全审查等限制性做法对投资进行过度限制，营造更加公平、透明、可预期的投资环境。




China encourages its enterprises to abide by local laws, fulfill corporate social responsibilities and observe business principles and international practices when they do business in host countries and conduct outward investment cooperation. China will continue to promote the sustainable, reasonable, orderly and sound development of outward investment, and effectively prevent risks of all kinds. Meanwhile, in order to create a more equitable, transparent and predictable environment for foreign investment, China calls on host countries to refrain from abusing security review or adopting other restrictive practices to impose excessive limitations on foreign investment.



（六）加快实施自贸区战略




6. Advancing the Free Trade Area Strategy



多边贸易体制和区域贸易安排是驱动经济全球化向前发展的两个轮子。中国维护多边贸易体制，推动自由贸易区建设。截至2018年5月，中国已与24个国家和地区签署16个自贸协定。2017年，与自贸伙伴的贸易额（不含港澳台）占中国对外贸易总额的25.9%。已签署的自贸协定中，零关税覆盖的产品范围基本超过90%，承诺开放的服务部门已从加入世贸组织时的100个增至近120个。中国将继续坚定不移地推进经济全球化、维护自由贸易，与有关各方早日签署并实施《区域全面经济伙伴关系协定》，加快亚太自贸区和东亚经济共同体建设，构建立足周边、辐射“一带一路”、面向全球的高标准自由贸易区网络。




The multilateral trading system and regional trade arrangement are the two wheels driving economic globalization forward. China upholds the multilateral trading system and promotes free trade arrangements. By May 2018, China had signed 16 free trade agreements (FTA) with 24 countries and regions. In 2017, trade between China and its FTA partners (excluding Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Macao Special Administrative Region, and Taiwan Province) accounted for 25.9 percent of China's total foreign trade. In those free trade agreements, basically 90 percent of imported products enjoy duty free treatment, and approximately 120 service sectors have been opened to foreign suppliers, compared to 100 service sectors in China's commitments to the WTO at the time when China joined the organization. Committed to advancing economic globalization and safeguarding free trade, China is negotiating with relevant parties the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership for its early conclusion and implementation, and is accelerating the building of Free Trade Area of Asia-Pacific and East Asia Economic Community. With all these efforts, China will build a high standard network of free trade areas, focusing on the neighboring areas, radiating across the Belt and Road and open to the world. 



结束语




Conclusion



当今世界正在经历新一轮大发展大变革大调整，人类面临的不稳定不确定因素依然很多。近年来，逆全球化潮流涌动，保护主义和单边主义抬头，以世贸组织为核心的多边贸易体制遭遇挑战。




The world is undergoing a new round of major development, great change and profound readjustment. The mankind still faces growing uncertainties and destabilizing factors. Surging tides of anti-globalization in recent years, coupled with rising protectionism and unilateralism, have posed severe challenges to the multilateral trading system with the WTO at its core.



经济全球化为世界经济增长提供了强劲动力，是不可逆转的时代潮流，中国与多边贸易体制休戚与共。中国将继续践行承诺、遵守规则，积极参与多边贸易体制建设，坚定支持世贸组织在全球经济治理中发挥更大作用。




Economic globalization has powered global growth and is an irreversible trend of our times. China and the multilateral trading system stand together through thick and thin. China will continue to fulfill its commitments, comply with rules, actively participate in the improvement of the multilateral trading system, and give firm support to the WTO in playing a greater role in global economic governance.



中国经济已由高速增长转向高质量发展，在这一历史进程中，中国将坚定不移贯彻创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念，完善社会主义市场经济体制，充分激发各类市场主体活力。




China's economy has been transitioning from rapid growth to high-quality development. In this historic process, China will pursue with firmness the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, and open development that is for everyone, improve the socialist market economy system, and stimulate the vitality of various market entities.



中国将把创新作为引领发展的第一动力，以更加开放的态度，继续加强创新和知识产权保护，加强国际交流合作，使技术发展和创新不仅造福中国而且惠及世界，让越来越多的人享受科技发展带来的便利。




China will take innovation as the primary driving force for development. China will adopt a more open attitude, strengthen the protection of innovation and intellectual property rights, and enhance international exchanges and cooperation. These efforts will ensure that technological development and innovation benefit not only China, but also the world, and its convenience readily accessible to more and more people.



中国主张各国共担时代责任、共享发展机遇。作为世界上最大的发展中国家，中国愿继续与各国共同应对经济全球化进程中出现的全球性问题，加强沟通、携手合作，推动全球经济治理朝着平等公正、合作共赢的方向发展。




China calls on all countries to jointly shoulder the responsibilities of our times and believes that all countries should have equal access to development opportunities. As the largest developing country in the world, China looks forward to further cooperation and communication with other countries to jointly respond to global issues that emerge in the process of globalization, and to building a global economic governance system based on equality, equity and win-win cooperation.



中国将以更大力度、更高水平的对外开放促进全球共同发展，为各国分享中国红利创造更多机会。中国愿与全球贸易伙伴一道，推动经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展，让不同国家、不同阶层、不同人群共享经济全球化的好处。




China commits itself to opening up wider and deeper to promote common development across the world, providing other countries with more opportunities to share the benefits of China's development. China is willing to work hand-in-hand with its global trading partners to make economic globalization more open, inclusive, balanced and win-win with benefits to all so that different countries, different social strata and different groups of people all share in the benefits of economic globalization.



①中国香港特别行政区、澳门特别行政区、台湾省均以单独关税区的身份在不同时间成为世界贸易组织成员，本白皮书不包括上述单独关税区与世界贸易组织的关系。




①China's Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Macao Special Administrative Region, and Taiwan Province all became members of the WTO as separate customs territories at different times, the cases of which are not discussed in this white paper.

尊敬的各位政府首脑，
尊敬的各位国际组织负责人，
尊敬的各位博鳌亚洲论坛理事，
各位来宾，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：




Your Excellencies Heads of Government,
Your Excellencies Heads of International Organizations,
Your Excellencies Members of the Board of Directors of the Boao Forum for Asia,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,



很高兴和大家相聚在美丽的海南岛，共同出席博鳌亚洲论坛2023年年会。首先，我谨代表中国政府，对年会的召开表示热烈祝贺！对各位嘉宾的到来表示诚挚欢迎！对大家长期以来给予中国发展的关心支持表示衷心感谢！




It gives me great pleasure to join you in the beautiful Hainan island for the Boao Forum for Asia Annual Conference 2023. Let me begin by extending, on behalf of the Chinese government, warm congratulations on the opening of the Annual Conference, a hearty welcome to all participating guests, and sincere appreciation to you all for your longstanding care and support for China's development.



这次年会以“不确定的世界：团结合作迎挑战，开放包容促发展”为主题，契合当前形势和各方关切，具有很强的现实意义。当今世界，变乱交织，人类社会面临前所未有的挑战，不稳定、不确定、难预料成为常态。在这个充满不确定性的大变局中，人们迫切希望能有更多更强大的确定性力量，来推动世界朝着美好的未来前进。




The theme of this year's Annual Conference, "An Uncertain World: Solidarity and Cooperation for Development amid Challenges", is highly relevant to our times and responsive to our shared concerns. In a world of turmoil and transformation, humanity is faced with unprecedented challenges. Instability, uncertainty and unexpected developments have become the norm. Amid the momentous shifts where uncertainty abounds, people yearn for more and stronger forces of certainty to drive the world to a brighter future.



10年前，习近平主席首次提出人类命运共同体的重要理念，此后又在包括博鳌亚洲论坛在内的诸多国际场合，深刻阐明了构建人类命运共同体的中国主张，进一步提出全球发展倡议、全球安全倡议、全球文明倡议，为全球发展与治理提供了中国方案。10年来，中国以务实行动推动构建人类命运共同体，取得一系列重大实践成果。特别是高质量共建“一带一路”，带动广大发展中国家加快发展，为世界经济拓展了新空间。同时，在倡导政治解决危机，解决国际热点问题，劝和促谈、化干戈为玉帛等方面，也作出了卓有成效的努力，展现了负责任的大国担当。这些都是人类命运共同体理念的生动实践。事实证明，人类命运共同体理念，已经成为引领时代潮流和人类进步的旗帜，成为推动世界持久和平、共同繁荣确定性力量的源泉。




Ten years ago, President Xi Jinping put forward the vision of building a community with a shared future for mankind. Later, he expounded China's proposition on this vision at this Forum and on many other international occasions, and went on to propose the Global Development Initiative (GDI), the Global Security Initiative (GSI) and the Global Civilization Initiative (GCI). These initiatives are China's proposals for global development and governance. Over the past ten years, China has taken concrete actions to advance the building of a community with a shared future for mankind, and achieved a series of major outcomes. The high-quality Belt and Road cooperation, in particular, has helped developing countries achieve faster development and opened up new space for the growth of the world economy. Meanwhile, China has made productive efforts as a major responsible country to champion political settlement of crises, resolve international hot-spot issues, facilitate peace talks and de-escalate tensions. These are the real steps that China has taken to build a community with a shared future for mankind. What has happened shows that the vision of a community with a shared future for mankind has become a banner that guides the trend of the times and human progress, and a source of certainty for lasting peace and shared prosperity in the world.



现在，亚洲和世界都处在历史演变的十字路口。我们要高举人类命运共同体理念的旗帜，携手构建亚洲命运共同体，打造世界的和平稳定锚、增长动力源、合作新高地，为世界和平与发展注入更多确定性，努力创造人类更加美好的未来。




Asia and the entire world are at a crossroads of history. We must hold high the banner of the vision of a community with a shared future for mankind, and join hands to foster an Asian community with a shared future. We need to work together to build an anchor for world peace, a source of impetus for global growth, and a new pacesetter for international cooperation, to add certainty to world peace and development and shape a better future for humanity.



第一，共同守护和平稳定的发展环境，为变乱交织的国际局势注入更多确定性。和平是发展的前提。过去几十年，亚洲之所以能取得世界瞩目的发展成就，离不开总体和平稳定的大环境；未来亚洲要实现更大发展，决不能生乱生战，否则就会自断前程。诞生于近70年前的和平共处五项原则和“万隆精神”，是亚洲人民的智慧结晶；以相互尊重、协商一致、照顾各方舒适度等为重要原则的“亚洲方式”，为国家间合作发展提供了基本遵循。世界形势越是动荡不安，我们越是要倍加珍惜这些宝贵财富，坚决守护来之不易的和平局面。要始终坚持睦邻友好，支持东盟在东亚区域合作中的中心地位，安危与共、命运与共，确保亚洲持久和平稳定。要落实全球安全倡议，坚持共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，反对滥用单边制裁和“长臂管辖”，反对选边站队、集团对抗和“新冷战”，坚持以和平方式解决国家间的分歧和争端，共同维护世界的和平安宁。




First, working together to maintain a peaceful and stable environment for development to bring greater certainty to the fluid global environment. Peace is the prerequisite for development. Without a generally peaceful and stable environment, Asia's remarkable progress in the past several decades would not have been possible. To achieve greater success, chaos and conflicts must not happen in Asia. Otherwise, the future of Asia would be lost. The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and the Bandung Spirit, which were developed nearly 70 years ago, encapsulate the wisdom of the Asian people. The Asian Way of mutual respect, consensus-building and accommodating the comfort levels of all parties provides the fundamental guide for countries to pursue development through cooperation. The more turbulent the world is, the more important it is for us to cherish these invaluable assets and firmly safeguard the hard-won peaceful environment. We need to stay committed to good neighborliness and amity, support ASEAN centrality in East Asian cooperation and work with a strong sense of togetherness in face of difficulty to keep Asia peaceful and stable. We need to implement the GSI, uphold the vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, oppose wanton use of unilateral sanctions and long-arm jurisdiction, reject taking sides, bloc confrontation and new Cold War, address differences and disputes through peaceful means to jointly uphold world peace and tranquility. 



第二，共同打造更具活力的增长中心，为世界经济复苏注入更多确定性。亚洲拥有全球近60%的人口、近40%的经济总量和超过30%的国际贸易，是世界经济的“压舱石”和“推进器”。我们要落实全球发展倡议，抓住新一轮科技革命和产业变革机遇，在数字经济、绿色经济等合作领域打造新增长极，使亚洲成为世界经济复苏和发展的“动力源”。要深入推进区域经济一体化，加强宏观政策协调，高质量实施《区域全面经济伙伴关系协定》，积极推进中国－东盟自贸区3.0版谈判，构筑优势互补、合作共赢的区域生产分工体系，推动形成更加开放的区域大市场。要构建开放型世界经济，高质量共建“一带一路”，促进全球贸易投资自由化便利化，反对贸易保护主义和“脱钩断链”，确保全球产业链供应链稳定畅通，为世界经济发展注入强劲动能。




Second, working together to build a more vibrant center of growth to bring greater certainty to world economic recovery. Asia, with nearly 60 percent of the world's population, almost 40 percent of the global economy and over 30 percent of international trade, is an anchor and propeller of global growth. We need to implement the GDI, seize the opportunities in the latest round of technological revolution and industrial transformation, foster new drivers of growth through cooperation on the digital economy and green economy, and make Asia a source of impetus for world economic recovery and growth. It is important to deepen regional economic integration and intensify macro policy coordination. We need to pursue high-quality implementation of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), and actively advance negotiations on the new round of China-ASEAN FTA upgrade. We need to develop a regional structure on the division of labor that draws on comparative strengths and advances win-win cooperation, and work to foster a big regional market of greater openness. We need to build an open world economy, promote high-quality Belt and Road cooperation, further liberalize and facilitate global trade and investment, oppose trade protectionism, decoupling or cutting supply chains, keep global industrial and supply chains stable and smooth, and inject strong dynamism into the global economy.



第三，共同拓展团结合作的有效途径，为深刻变革的全球治理注入更多确定性。当今世界是一个地球村，各国的前途命运紧密联系在一起，面临的许多全球性问题需要大家共同商量解决。去年，亚洲国家先后成功举办金砖国家领导人会晤、东亚合作领导人系列会议、二十国集团领导人峰会、亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议，为完善全球治理发挥了重要作用。我们要坚持共商共建共享的全球治理观，积极参与全球治理体系改革和建设，坚定维护以联合国为核心的国际体系和以国际法为基础的国际秩序，不断深化粮食、能源、生态环保、防灾减灾、气候变化、减贫等领域合作，共同发出和平与发展的时代强音，共同释放坚持多边主义的积极信号，推动全球治理体系朝着更加公正合理方向发展。




Third, working together to expand effective ways for enhanced solidarity and cooperation to bring greater certainty to the shifting global governance. Today's world is a global village where the futures and destinies of all countries are closely intertwined. The many global issues confronting humanity need to be addressed through consultation by all. Last year, Asian countries successfully hosted the BRICS Summit, the Leaders' Meetings on East Asian Cooperation, the G20 Summit and the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting, playing an important role in improving global governance. We need to keep to the approach of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits to exercising global governance, take an active part in reforming and building the global governance system, and firmly uphold the UN-centered international system and the international order based on international law. We need to deepen cooperation on food, energy, environmental protection, disaster prevention and relief, climate response and poverty reduction, jointly make a strong call for peace and development, and send a positive signal of upholding multilateralism to make the global governance system more just and equitable.  



第四，共同推动人文交流走深走实，为不同文明的交融共生注入更多确定性。前不久，习近平主席提出全球文明倡议，为推进文明交流互鉴、促进人类文明进步提供了重要指引。亚洲是文明多样性的代表，不同文明交相辉映，同时，亚洲各国处于不同发展阶段，大多数国家仍然是发展中国家，每个国家都有自己独特的历史文化和具体国情。我们愿与各方一道落实全球文明倡议，努力开创人文交流、文化交融、民心相通的新局面。要坚持互尊互信、开放包容，尊重各国自主选择的发展道路，反对“文明冲突论”和意识形态对抗。要弘扬全人类共同价值，加强文化、教育、卫生、青年、媒体等领域交流，以真诚沟通增进理解和信任，以求同存异妥善处理分歧和问题，打造不同文明交融共生的样板。




Fourth, working together to pursue deeper and more substantive people-to-people exchanges to bring greater certainty to the interactions among civilizations. Not long ago, President Xi Jinping proposed the Global Civilization Initiative, providing an important direction for advancing inter-civilizational exchanges and mutual learning, and promoting the progress of human civilization. Asia is a showcase of cultural diversity where different civilizations enrich and inspire one another. Meanwhile, Asian countries are at different development stages, with developing countries accounting for the majority. Each country has its unique history, culture and national condition. We wish to work with all parties to implement the GCI and open up new prospects in people-to-people exchanges and cultural interactions that bring our peoples closer. We need to uphold mutual respect and trust, embrace openness and inclusiveness, respect the development paths that countries choose on their own, and reject the notion of "clash of civilizations" and ideological confrontation. We need to promote the common values of humanity, and increase exchanges in culture, education, health and among our young people and the media. We need to increase understanding and trust through sincere communication, and properly handle disagreements and problems in the spirit of seeking common ground while setting aside differences, to create a model of sound interactions among different civilizations.  



女士们、先生们、朋友们！




Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,



作为世界上最大的发展中国家，中国的发展本身就具有世界意义。我们在全力办好自己事情的同时，主动顺应和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流，始终做世界和平的建设者、全球发展的贡献者、国际秩序的维护者。中国创造了经济快速发展和社会长期稳定两大奇迹，这本身就是对世界的贡献。可以说，在不确定的世界中，中国的确定性，是维护世界和平与发展的中流砥柱。过去如此，未来和当下更是如此。




As the world's largest developing country, China's development itself has global impacts. While focusing on running our own affairs well, we in China have followed the trend of the times of peace, development, cooperation and mutual benefit, and have been a builder of world peace, a contributor to global development and a defender of international order. China has created the twin miracles of rapid economic growth and enduring social stability, which in itself is a contribution to the world. In this uncertain world, the certainty that China offers is an anchor for global peace and development. This has been the case in the past, and will remain so in the future. 



从未来看，中国发展的目标和前景是确定的。去年10月份召开的中国共产党第二十次全国代表大会，擘画了中国未来发展的蓝图，明确提出到本世纪中叶，中国共产党的中心任务就是团结带领全国各族人民全面建成社会主义现代化强国、实现第二个百年奋斗目标，以中国式现代化全面推进中华民族伟大复兴。中国要建设的现代化，是人口规模巨大、全体人民共同富裕、物质文明和精神文明相协调、人与自然和谐共生、走和平发展道路的现代化，我们决不会通过战争、殖民、掠夺等方式实现现代化，一定会用和平和发展的方式使14亿多人口整体迈进现代化社会，这将为亚洲和世界经济增长带来强劲动能。完成这个中心任务，需要长时间的持续奋斗。在这个过程中，不论世界发生什么样的变化，我们都将始终坚持改革开放、创新驱动，既为整个世界经济发展不断注入新的动力和活力，也让世界各国分享中国发展的机遇和红利。我想，一个长期稳定、一心发展的中国，一个脚踏实地、勇毅前行的中国，一个自信开放、乐于共享的中国，一定是世界繁荣稳定的巨大力量。




Looking ahead over the longer run, there is certainty in the goals and prospects of China's development. The 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) held last October drew up a blueprint for China's future development. The Congress made it clear that by the middle of the century, the central task of the CPC is to lead the Chinese people of all ethnic groups in a concerted effort to realize the second centenary goal of building China into a great modern socialist country in all respects and to advance the rejuvenation of the Chinese nation on all fronts through a Chinese path to modernization. The modernization that China aims to achieve is the modernization that involves a huge population and features common prosperity for all, material and cultural-ethical advancement, harmony between man and nature, and peaceful development. We will not pursue such modernization through war, colonization or plunder, but peace and development to bring our entire 1.4 billion-plus people into a modern society. This will create powerful impetus for economic growth in Asia and beyond. Accomplishing this central task requires long, persistent efforts. In this process, no matter how the world situation may evolve, we will stay committed to reform, opening-up and innovation-driven development. We will continue to inject new vigor and vitality into the global economic development, and welcome countries around the world to share in the opportunities and benefits that come with China's development. I believe a China that is stable and dedicated to development, a China that is down-to-earth and pressing ahead with fortitude, and a China that is confident, open and sharing will surely be a strong force for global prosperity and stability. 



从当下看，中国经济增长的动能和态势是强劲的。今年前两个月，中国经济呈现恢复向好态势，消费、投资等主要经济指标向好，就业物价总体稳定，市场预期明显改善，制造业采购经理指数连续站在荣枯线以上，多个国际组织上调了今年中国经济增速预期。现实场景可能比统计数据更有说服力。以博鳌论坛所在的海南岛为例，旅游业从春节“黄金周”变成了“黄金月”“黄金季”，始终是游人如织，离岛免税品销售持续火热，这都充分反映出中国经济韧性强、潜力大、活力足，反映出中国经济长期向好的基本面，也反映出中国经济社会发展政策措施的科学有效。下一步，我们将继续坚持稳字当头、稳中求进，巩固拓展经济恢复向好态势，推动经济运行持续整体好转；我们将把实施扩大内需战略同深化供给侧结构性改革有机结合起来，持续扩大中国市场规模；我们将在扩大市场准入、优化营商环境、保障项目落地等方面推出新的举措，不断优化国企敢干、民企敢闯、外企敢投的制度环境；我们将有效防范化解重大风险，特别是保持我国金融运行整体稳健，牢牢守住不发生系统性风险的底线。我们有信心有能力推动中国经济的巨轮乘风破浪、行稳致远，为世界经济发展作出更大贡献。




Looking at the near term, both the dynamism and momentum of China's growth are strong. In the first two months of this year, the Chinese economy showed an encouraging momentum of rebound. Major indicators including consumption and investment picked up. Employment and prices were broadly stable. Market expectations improved notably. The manufacturing PMI has remained above the 50-point mark. Several international organizations have revised up their forecasts for China's growth this year. Perhaps more telling than the statistics is the actual situation on the ground. Take Hainan, the seat of the Boao Forum, for example. In the past, tourism usually boomed during the week of the Spring Festival holiday. Now we are seeing the "golden tourism week" extending to "golden month" and even "golden season" as the island sees a steady inflow of tourists and a sustained boom in offshore duty-free sales. It is a good indicator of the resilience, potential and vibrancy of the Chinese economy. It is also strong proof that the fundamentals underpinning China's long-term growth are robust and China's economic and social policies are sound and effective. Going forward, we will continue to prioritize stability, seek progress while maintaining stability, consolidate and build on the momentum of recovery and work for sustained and overall improvement in the economic performance. We will combine the strategy of expanding domestic demand with deepening supply-side structural reform to make China's market even bigger. We will roll out new measures to increase market access, improve the business climate and ensure the delivery of projects to create a better institutional environment that enables SOEs to take new initiative, private companies to break new ground and foreign companies to make new investment. We will effectively prevent and defuse major risks, safeguard the overall stability of China's financial sector in particular, and guard against systemic risks. We have the confidence and ability to sail the giant ship of the Chinese economy steadily ahead against all winds and waves, and make even greater contributions to the global economy. 



女士们、先生们、朋友们！




Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,



今年还有一件“亚洲大事”，就是第19届亚运会将于金秋时节在杭州举行。疫情让相会延期，也让我们对相聚更加期待。从天涯海角到西子湖畔，开放的中国有许多美丽的地方，欢迎大家多去走走看看。有风景的地方，一定就有新经济，也会有很多互利共赢的合作商机。我相信，只要我们携起手来，团结合作迎挑战，开放包容促发展，就一定能给亚洲、给世界带来更多的确定性，就一定能开创人类社会更加美好的未来！




There is another big event in Asia this year. That is the 19th Asian Games to be held in Hangzhou of China this autumn. The pandemic may have postponed the Games, but it also made us look even more forward to this rendezvous. The coastlines in Hainan and the West Lake in Hangzhou are just two of the many beautiful places across China. We welcome you to visit more places. Where there are scenic areas, there is new economy and business opportunities for win-win cooperation. I am confident that as we join hands to meet challenges through cooperation, and promote development with an open and inclusive mind, we will bring greater certainty to Asia and the world, and usher in an even brighter future for humankind. 



最后，预祝博鳌亚洲论坛2023年年会圆满成功！




To conclude, I wish this year's Boao Forum for Asia a full success.



谢谢大家！




Thank you.


携手建设守望相助、共同发展、普遍安全、世代友好的中国－中亚命运共同体
——在中国－中亚峰会上的主旨讲话
（2023年5月19日）
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平




Working Together for a China-Central Asia Community with a Shared Future
Featuring Mutual Assistance, Common Development, Universal Security, and Everlasting Friendship
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the China-Central Asia Summit
19 May 2023



尊敬的各位同事，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：




Distinguished Colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,



欢迎大家来到西安，出席中国－中亚峰会，共商中国同中亚五国合作大计。




I'd like to welcome you all to Xi'an for the China-Central Asia Summit to explore together ways for closer cooperation between China and the five Central Asian countries.



西安古称长安，是中华文明和中华民族的重要发祥地之一，也是古丝绸之路的东方起点。2100多年前，中国汉代使者张骞自长安出发，出使西域，打开了中国同中亚友好交往的大门。千百年来，中国同中亚各族人民一道推动了丝绸之路的兴起和繁荣，为世界文明交流交融、丰富发展作出了历史性贡献。中国唐代诗人李白曾有过“长安复携手，再顾重千金”的诗句。今天我们在西安相聚，续写千年友谊，开辟崭新未来，具有十分重要的意义。




Xi'an, known as Chang'an in ancient times, is an important cradle of the Chinese civilization and nation. It is also the starting point of the ancient Silk Road on the east end. Over 2,100 years ago, Zhang Qian, a Han Dynasty envoy, made his journey to the West from Chang'an, opening the door to the friendship and exchanges between China and Central Asia. With their joint endeavor of hundreds of years, Chinese and Central Asian peoples made the Silk Road expand and prosper, a historic contribution to the interaction, integration, enrichment and development of world civilizations. The Tang Dynasty poet Li Bai once wrote, "In Chang'an we meet again, worthy of more than a thousand pieces of gold." Our gathering in Xi'an today to renew our millennia-old friendship and open up new vistas for the future is of very important significance.



2013年，我担任中国国家主席后首次出访中亚，提出共建“丝绸之路经济带”倡议。10年来，中国同中亚国家携手推动丝绸之路全面复兴，倾力打造面向未来的深度合作，将双方关系带入一个崭新时代。




Back in 2013, I put forward the initiative of jointly building a Silk Road Economic Belt during my first visit to Central Asia as Chinese president. Over the past decade, China and Central Asian countries have worked closely together to fully revive the Silk Road and actively deepen future-oriented cooperation, steering our relations into a new era.



横跨天山的中吉乌公路，征服帕米尔高原的中塔公路，穿越茫茫大漠的中哈原油管道、中国－中亚天然气管道，就是当代的“丝路”；日夜兼程的中欧班列，不绝于途的货运汽车，往来不歇的空中航班，就是当代的“驼队”；寻觅商机的企业家，抗击新冠疫情的医护人员，传递友谊之声的文化工作者，上下求索的留学生，就是当代的友好使者。




The China-Kyrgyzstan-Uzbekistan highway that runs across the Tianshan Mountain, the China-Tajikistan expressway that defies the Pamir Plateau, and the China-Kazakhstan crude oil pipeline and the China-Central Asia Gas Pipeline that traverse the vast desert -- they are the present-day Silk Road. The China-Europe Railway Express operating around the clock, the endless streams of freight trucks, and crisscrossing flights -- they are the present-day camel caravans. Entrepreneurs seeking business opportunities, health workers fighting the COVID-19, cultural workers delivering message of friendship, and international students pursuing further education -- they are the present-day goodwill ambassadors.



中国同中亚国家关系有着深厚的历史渊源、广泛的现实需求、坚实的民意基础，在新时代焕发出勃勃生机和旺盛活力。




The China-Central Asia relationship is steeped in history, driven by broad actual needs, and built on solid popular support. Our relations are brimming with vigor and vitality in the new era.



各位同事！




Colleagues,



当前，百年变局加速演进，世界之变、时代之变、历史之变正以前所未有的方式展开。中亚是亚欧大陆的中心，处在联通东西、贯穿南北的十字路口。




Transformations of the world unseen in a century are unfolding at a faster pace. Changes of the world, of our times, and of the historical trajectory are taking place in ways like never before. Central Asia, the center of the Eurasian continent, is at a crossroads connecting the East and West, the South and North.



世界需要一个稳定的中亚。中亚国家主权、安全、独立、领土完整必须得到维护，中亚人民自主选择的发展道路必须得到尊重，中亚地区致力于和平、和睦、安宁的努力必须得到支持。




The world needs a stable Central Asia. The sovereignty, security, independence and territorial integrity of Central Asian countries must be upheld; their people's choice of development paths must be respected; and their efforts for peace, harmony and tranquility must be supported.



世界需要一个繁荣的中亚。一个充满活力、蒸蒸日上的中亚，将实现地区各国人民对美好生活的向往，也将为世界经济复苏发展注入强劲动力。




The world needs a prosperous Central Asia. A dynamic and prospering Central Asia will help people in the region achieve their aspiration for a better life. It will also lend strong impetus to global economic recovery.



世界需要一个和谐的中亚。“兄弟情谊胜过一切财富”。民族冲突、宗教纷争、文化隔阂不是中亚的主调，团结、包容、和睦才是中亚人民的追求。任何人都无权在中亚制造不和、对立，更不应该从中谋取政治私利。




The world needs a harmonious Central Asia. As a Central Asian saying goes, "Brotherhood is more precious than any treasure." Ethnic conflicts, religious strife, and cultural estrangement are not the defining feature of the region. Instead, solidarity, inclusiveness, and harmony are the pursuits of the Central Asian people. No one has the right to sow discord or stoke confrontation in the region, let alone seek selfish political interests.



世界需要一个联通的中亚。中亚拥有得天独厚的地理优势，有基础、有条件、有能力成为亚欧大陆重要的互联互通枢纽，为世界商品交换、文明交流、科技发展作出中亚贡献。




The world needs an interconnected Central Asia. Blessed with unique geographical advantages, Central Asia has the right foundation, condition and capability to become an important connectivity hub of Eurasia and make unique contribution to the trading of goods, the interplay of civilizations and the development of science and technology in the world.



各位同事！




Colleagues,



去年，我们举行庆祝中国同中亚五国建交30周年视频峰会时，共同宣布建设中国－中亚命运共同体。这是我们在新的时代背景下，着眼各国人民根本利益和光明未来，作出的历史性选择。建设中国－中亚命运共同体，要做到四个坚持。




At the virtual summit commemorating the 30th anniversary of diplomatic relations between China and Central Asian countries held last year, we jointly announced our vision of a China-Central Asia community with a shared future. It was a historic choice made for the fundamental interests and bright future of our peoples in the new era. In building this community, we need to stay committed to four principles.



一是坚持守望相助。我们要深化战略互信，在涉及主权、独立、民族尊严、长远发展等核心利益问题上，始终给予彼此明确、有力支持，携手建设一个守望相助、团结互信的共同体。




First, mutual assistance. It is important that we deepen strategic mutual trust, and always give each other unequivocal and strong support on issues concerning our core interests such as sovereignty, independence, national dignity, and long-term development. We should work together to ensure that our community features mutual assistance, solidarity, and mutual trust.



二是坚持共同发展。我们要继续在共建“一带一路”合作方面走在前列，推动落实全球发展倡议，充分释放经贸、产能、能源、交通等传统合作潜力，打造金融、农业、减贫、绿色低碳、医疗卫生、数字创新等新增长点，携手建设一个合作共赢、相互成就的共同体。




Second, common development. It is important that we continue to set the pace for Belt and Road cooperation and deliver on the Global Development Initiative. We should fully unlock our potentials in traditional areas of cooperation such as economy, trade, industrial capacity, energy and transportation. And we should forge new drivers of growth in finance, agriculture, poverty reduction, green and low-carbon development, medical service, health, and digital innovation. We should work together to ensure that our community features win-win cooperation and common progress.



三是坚持普遍安全。我们要共同践行全球安全倡议，坚决反对外部势力干涉地区国家内政、策动“颜色革命”，保持对“三股势力”零容忍，着力破解地区安全困境，携手建设一个远离冲突、永沐和平的共同体。




Third, universal security. It is important that we act on the Global Security Initiative, and stand firm against external attempts to interfere in domestic affairs of regional countries or instigate color revolutions. We should remain zero-tolerant to the three forces of terrorism, separatism and extremism, and strive to resolve security conundrums in the region. We should work together to ensure that our community features no-conflict and enduring peace.



四是坚持世代友好。我们要践行全球文明倡议，赓续传统友谊，密切人员往来，加强治国理政经验交流，深化文明互鉴，增进相互理解，筑牢中国同中亚国家人民世代友好的基石，携手建设一个相知相亲、同心同德的共同体。




Fourth, everlasting friendship. It is important that we implement the Global Civilization Initiative, carry forward our traditional friendship, and enhance people-to-people exchanges. We should do more to share our experience in governance, deepen cultural mutual learning, increase mutual understanding, and cement the foundation of the everlasting friendship between the Chinese and Central Asian peoples. We should work together to ensure that our community features close affinity and shared conviction.



各位同事！




Colleagues,



这次峰会为中国同中亚合作搭建了新平台，开辟了新前景。中方愿以举办这次峰会为契机，同各方密切配合，将中国－中亚合作规划好、建设好、发展好。




Our Summit has created a new platform and opened up new prospects for China-Central Asia cooperation. China will take this as an opportunity to step up coordination with all parties for good planning, development and progress of China-Central Asia cooperation.



一是加强机制建设。我们已经成立外交、经贸、海关等会晤机制和实业家委员会。中方还倡议成立产业与投资、农业、交通、应急管理、教育、政党等领域会晤和对话机制，为各国开展全方位互利合作搭建广泛平台。




First, we need to strengthen institutional building. We have set up meeting mechanisms on foreign affairs, economy, trade and customs, as well as a business council. China has also proposed establishment of meeting and dialogue mechanisms on industry and investment, agriculture, transportation, emergency response, education, and political parties, which will be platforms for all-round mutually beneficial cooperation between our countries.



二是拓展经贸关系。中方将出台更多贸易便利化举措，升级双边投资协定，实现双方边境口岸农副产品快速通关“绿色通道”全覆盖，举办“聚合中亚云品”主题活动，打造大宗商品交易中心，推动贸易规模迈上新台阶。




Second, we need to expand economic and trade ties. China will take more trade facilitation measures, upgrade bilateral investment treaties, and open "green lanes" for streamlined customs clearance of agricultural and sideline products at all border ports between China and Central Asian countries. China will also hold a live-streaming sales event to further promote Central Asian products, and build a commodities trading center. All this is part of an effort to push two-way trade to new heights.



三是深化互联互通。中方将全面提升跨境运输过货量，支持跨里海国际运输走廊建设，提升中吉乌、中塔乌公路通行能力，推进中吉乌铁路项目对接磋商。加快现有口岸现代化改造，增开别迭里口岸，大力推进航空运输市场开放，发展地区物流网络。加强中欧班列集结中心建设，鼓励优势企业在中亚国家建设海外仓，构建综合数字服务平台。




Third, we need to deepen connectivity. China will strive to increase the volume of cross-border cargo transportation, support the development of the trans-Caspian international transport corridor, enhance the traffic capacity of the China-Kyrgyzstan-Uzbekistan highway and the China-Tajikistan-Uzbekistan highway, and move forward consultations on the China-Kyrgyzstan-Uzbekistan railway. China will seek to modernize the existing border ports at a faster pace, open a new border port at Biedieli, promote the opening of the air transportation market, and build a regional logistics network. China will also step up the development of China-Europe Railway Express assembly centers, encourage capable enterprises to build overseas warehouses in Central Asian countries, and build a comprehensive digital service platform.



四是扩大能源合作。中方倡议建立中国－中亚能源发展伙伴关系，加快推进中国－中亚天然气管道D线建设，扩大双方油气贸易规模，发展能源全产业链合作，加强新能源与和平利用核能合作。




Fourth, we need to expand energy cooperation. China would like to propose that we establish a China-Central Asia energy development partnership. We should expedite the construction of Line D of the China-Central Asia Gas Pipeline, expand trade in oil and gas, pursue cooperation throughout the energy industrial chains, and strengthen cooperation on new energy and peaceful use of nuclear energy.



五是推进绿色创新。中方愿同中亚国家在盐碱地治理开发、节水灌溉等领域开展合作，共同建设旱区农业联合实验室，推动解决咸海生态危机，支持在中亚建立高技术企业、信息技术产业园。中方欢迎中亚国家参与可持续发展技术、创新创业、空间信息科技等“一带一路”专项合作计划。




Fifth, we need to promote green innovation. China will work with Central Asian countries to conduct cooperation in such areas as improvement and utilization of saline-alkali land and water-saving irrigation, build together a joint laboratory on agriculture in arid lands, and tackle the ecological crisis of the Aral Sea. China supports establishing high-tech firms and IT industrial parks in Central Asia. China also welcomes Central Asian countries to participate in special cooperation programs under the Belt and Road Initiative, including programs on sustainable development technologies, innovation and start-up, and spatial information science and technology.



六是提升发展能力。中方将制定中国同中亚国家科技减贫专项合作计划，实施“中国－中亚技术技能提升计划”，在中亚国家设立更多鲁班工坊，鼓励在中亚的中资企业为当地提供更多就业机会。为助力中国同中亚国家合作和中亚国家自身发展，中方将向中亚国家提供总额260亿元人民币的融资支持和无偿援助。




Sixth, we need to enhance capabilities for development. China will formulate a China-Central Asia special cooperation program for poverty reduction through science and technology, implement the "China-Central Asia technology and skills improvement scheme", set up more Luban Workshops in Central Asian countries, and encourage Chinese companies in Central Asia to create more local jobs. To bolster our cooperation and Central Asian development, China will provide Central Asian countries with a total of 26 billion RMB yuan of financing support and grant.



七是加强文明对话。中方邀请中亚国家参与“文化丝路”计划，将在中亚设立更多传统医学中心，加快互设文化中心，继续向中亚国家提供政府奖学金名额，支持中亚国家高校加入“丝绸之路大学联盟”，办好中国同中亚国家人民文化艺术年和中国－中亚媒体高端对话交流活动，推动开展“中国－中亚文化和旅游之都”评选活动、开行面向中亚的人文旅游专列。




Seventh, we need to strengthen dialogue between civilizations. China invites Central Asian countries to take part in the "Cultural Silk Road" program, and will set up more traditional medicine centers in Central Asia. We will speed up establishment of cultural centers in each other's countries. China will continue to provide government scholarships for Central Asian countries, and support their universities in joining the University Alliance of the Silk Road. We will ensure the success of the Year of Culture and Arts for the Peoples of China and Central Asian Countries as well as the China-Central Asia high-level media dialogue. We will launch the "China-Central Asia Cultural and Tourism Capital" program, and open special train services for cultural tourism in Central Asia.



八是维护地区和平。中方愿帮助中亚国家加强执法安全和防务能力建设，支持各国自主维护地区安全和反恐努力，开展网络安全合作。继续发挥阿富汗邻国协调机制作用，共同推动阿富汗和平重建。




Eighth, we need to safeguard peace in the region. China is ready to help Central Asian countries strengthen capacity building on law enforcement, security and defense, support their independent efforts to safeguard regional security and fight terrorism, and work with them to promote cyber-security. We will continue to leverage the role of the coordination mechanism among Afghanistan's neighbors, and jointly promote peace and reconstruction in Afghanistan.



各位同事！




Colleagues,



去年十月，中国共产党第二十次全国代表大会成功召开，明确了全面建成社会主义现代化强国、实现第二个百年奋斗目标、以中国式现代化全面推进中华民族伟大复兴的中心任务，绘就了中国未来发展的宏伟蓝图。我们愿同中亚国家加强现代化理念和实践交流，推进发展战略对接，为合作创造更多机遇，协力推动六国现代化进程。




Last October, the Communist Party of China successfully held its 20th National Congress, which laid out the central task of realizing the Second Centenary Goal of building China into a great modern socialist country in all respects and advancing rejuvenation of the Chinese nation on all fronts through a Chinese path to modernization. It is a grand blueprint for China's future development. We will strengthen theoretical and practical exchanges with Central Asian countries on modernization, synergize our development strategies, create more opportunities for cooperation, and jointly advance the modernization process of our six countries.



各位同事！




Colleagues,



中国陕西有句农谚，“只要功夫深，土里出黄金”。中亚谚语也说，“付出就有回报，播种就能收获”。让我们携手并肩，团结奋斗，积极推进共同发展、共同富裕、共同繁荣，共同迎接六国更加美好的明天！




There is a proverb popular among farmers in Shaanxi Province, "If you work hard enough, gold will grow out of the land." In the same vein, a Central Asian saying goes, "You get rewarded if you give, and you harvest if you sow." Let us work closely together to pursue common development, common affluence, and common prosperity, and embrace a brighter future for our six countries!



谢谢大家。




Thank you.

各位代表：




Fellow deputies,



这次大会选举我继续担任中华人民共和国主席，我对各位代表和全国各族人民的信任，表示衷心感谢！




I was elected at this session to continue to serve as the president of the People's Republic of China (PRC). I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude for the trust placed in me by all the deputies and the Chinese people of all ethnic groups.



这是我第三次担任国家主席这一崇高职务。人民的信任，是我前进的最大动力，也是我肩上沉甸甸的责任。我将忠实履行宪法赋予的职责，以国家需要为使命，以人民利益为准绳，恪尽职守，竭诚奉献，绝不辜负各位代表和全国各族人民的重托！




It is my third time to take on this noble position of the president of the PRC. The people's trust has been my greatest source of strength to go forward and also the greatest responsibility on my shoulders. I will faithfully fulfill the duties prescribed in the Constitution, take the needs of the country as my mission and the people's interests as the yardstick to follow, be committed and honest in my duties, devote myself to my work without reserve, and never fail to live up to the great trust of the deputies and the people.



各位代表！




Fellow deputies,



具有五千多年文明史的中华民族，在历史上创造了无数辉煌，也经历过许多磨难。近代以后，中国逐步成为半殖民地半封建社会，饱受列强欺凌、四分五裂、战乱频繁、生灵涂炭之苦。中国共产党成立之后，紧紧团结带领全国各族人民，经过百年奋斗，洗雪民族耻辱，中国人民成为自己命运的主人，中华民族迎来了从站起来、富起来到强起来的伟大飞跃，中华民族伟大复兴进入了不可逆转的历史进程。




The Chinese nation, with a civilization spanning over 5,000 years, has created a myriad of glories and also been through a lot of hardships and adversity. With the advent of modern times, China was reduced to a semi-feudal and semi-colonial society, when bullying by foreign powers and frequent wars tore the country apart and plunged the Chinese people into an abyss of great suffering. Since its founding, the Communist Party of China (CPC) has closely united and led the Chinese people of all ethnic groups in working hard for a century to put an end to China's national humiliation. The Chinese people have become the masters of their future, the Chinese nation has achieved the great transformation from standing up and growing prosperous to becoming strong, and China's national rejuvenation has become a historical inevitability.



从现在起到本世纪中叶，全面建成社会主义现代化强国、全面推进中华民族伟大复兴，是全党全国人民的中心任务。强国建设、民族复兴的接力棒，历史地落在我们这一代人身上。我们要按照党的二十大的战略部署，坚持统筹推进“五位一体”总体布局、协调推进“四个全面”战略布局，加快推进中国式现代化建设，团结奋斗，开拓创新，在新征程上作出无负时代、无负历史、无负人民的业绩，为推进强国建设、民族复兴作出我们这一代人的应有贡献！




From now until the middle of the century, the central task of the Party and all Chinese people is to complete building China into a great modern socialist country in all respects and advance national rejuvenation on all fronts. And the baton of this central task has now been historically passed on to our generation. In accordance with the strategic plans made at the 20th CPC National Congress, we must implement the Five-Sphere Integrated Plan and the Four-Pronged Comprehensive Strategy, speed up Chinese modernization, strive in unity, and continue to break new ground, so as to make achievements on the new journey that answer the call of our times and history and meet the expectations of our people, and make due contributions of our generation to building a great country and achieving national rejuvenation.



各位代表！




Fellow deputies,



在强国建设、民族复兴的新征程，我们要坚定不移推动高质量发展。要完整、准确、全面贯彻新发展理念，加快构建新发展格局，深入实施科教兴国战略、人才强国战略、创新驱动发展战略，着力提升科技自立自强能力，推动产业转型升级，推动城乡区域协调发展，推动经济社会发展绿色化、低碳化，推动经济实现质的有效提升和量的合理增长，不断壮大我国经济实力、科技实力、综合国力。




On the new journey to build China into a great country and to achieve national rejuvenation, we must unswervingly promote high-quality development. We must fully and faithfully apply the new development philosophy on all fronts and accelerate the efforts to foster a new development pattern. We must fully implement the strategy for invigorating China through science and education, the workforce development strategy and the innovation-driven development strategy, and focus on achieving greater self-reliance and strength in science and technology. We must also promote transformation and upgrading of industries, promote coordinated urban-rural and regional development, make further efforts to build a green and low-carbon economy and society, and effectively upgrade the quality and appropriately expand the output of our economy, so as to constantly increase our economic strength, scientific and technological capabilities and composite national strength.



我们要始终坚持人民至上。全面建成社会主义现代化强国，人民是决定性力量。要积极发展全过程人民民主，坚持党的领导、人民当家作主、依法治国有机统一，健全人民当家作主制度体系，实现人民意志，保障人民权益，充分激发全体人民的积极性主动性创造性。要贯彻以人民为中心的发展思想，完善分配制度，健全社会保障体系，强化基本公共服务，兜牢民生底线，解决好人民群众急难愁盼问题，让现代化建设成果更多更公平惠及全体人民，在推进全体人民共同富裕上不断取得更为明显的实质性进展。要不断巩固发展全国各族人民大团结、海内外中华儿女大团结，充分调动一切积极因素，凝聚起强国建设、民族复兴的磅礴力量。




We must remain committed to putting the people first. The people are the decisive force for building China into a great modern socialist country in all respects. We must proactively develop whole-process people's democracy, uphold the unity between the Party leadership, the running of the country by the people and law-based governance, improve the system of institutions through which the people run the country, fulfill the people's will, protect their rights and interests and fully inspire their enthusiasm, initiative and creativity. We need to implement a people-centered philosophy of development, improve the system of income distribution, perfect the social security system, and enhance basic public services. We must ensure that the basic living needs of all our people are met, and work hard to resolve the pressing difficulties and problems that concern them most. We must do a better job of seeing to it that the gains of modernization benefit all our people fairly, and make more notable and substantive progress in promoting common prosperity for all. We must strengthen the great unity of the Chinese people of all ethnic groups and the great unity of all the sons and daughters of the Chinese nation at home and abroad, thus mobilizing all positive factors to give shape to a mighty joint force for building a great country and advancing the rejuvenation of the Chinese nation.



我们要更好统筹发展和安全。安全是发展的基础，稳定是强盛的前提。要贯彻总体国家安全观，健全国家安全体系，增强维护国家安全能力，提高公共安全治理水平，完善社会治理体系，以新安全格局保障新发展格局。要全面推进国防和军队现代化建设，把人民军队建设成为有效维护国家主权、安全、发展利益的钢铁长城。




We need to better coordinate development and security. Security is the foundation of development and stability is the prerequisite for prosperity. We must resolutely pursue a holistic approach to national security, improve the national security system, strengthen our capacity for safeguarding national security, enhance public security governance, and improve the social governance system. With this new security architecture, we will be able to better safeguard China's new pattern of development. We should comprehensively promote the modernization of our national defense and our armed forces, and build the people's military into a great wall of steel that can effectively safeguard our nation's sovereignty, security and the interests of our development.



我们要扎实推进“一国两制”实践和祖国统一大业。推进强国建设，离不开香港、澳门长期繁荣稳定。要全面准确、坚定不移贯彻“一国两制”、“港人治港”、“澳人治澳”、高度自治的方针，坚持依法治港治澳，支持香港、澳门特别行政区发展经济、改善民生，更好融入国家发展大局。实现祖国完全统一是全体中华儿女的共同愿望，是民族复兴的题中之义。要贯彻新时代党解决台湾问题的总体方略，坚持一个中国原则和“九二共识”，积极促进两岸关系和平发展，坚决反对外部势力干涉和“台独”分裂活动，坚定不移推进祖国统一进程。




We should solidly promote the practice of "one country, two systems" and the great cause of national reunification. The long-term prosperity and stability of Hong Kong and Macao special administrative regions is indispensable to the building of a great China. We should fully, faithfully, and resolutely implement the policy of "one country, two systems," under which the people of Hong Kong administer Hong Kong and the people of Macao administer Macao, both with a high degree of autonomy. We will remain committed to law-based governance in Hong Kong and Macao and will support Hong Kong and Macao in developing their economies and improving people's livelihood, so that they can better integrate themselves into the overall development of the country. Realizing China's complete reunification is a shared aspiration of all the sons and daughters of the Chinese nation as well as the essence of national rejuvenation. We should implement the Party's overall policy for resolving the Taiwan question in the new era, uphold the one-China principle and the 1992 Consensus, actively promote the peaceful development of cross-Strait relations, resolutely oppose foreign interference and separatist activities aimed at "Taiwan independence," and unswervingly promote progress towards national reunification.



我们要努力推动构建人类命运共同体。中国的发展惠及世界，中国的发展离不开世界。我们要扎实推进高水平对外开放，既用好全球市场和资源发展自己，又推动世界共同发展。我们要高举和平、发展、合作、共赢旗帜，始终站在历史正确一边，践行真正的多边主义，践行全人类共同价值，积极参与全球治理体系改革和建设，推动建设开放型世界经济，推动落实全球发展倡议、全球安全倡议，为世界和平发展增加更多稳定性和正能量，为我国发展营造良好国际环境。




We must strive to promote the building of a community with a shared future for mankind. China's development benefits the world, and China cannot develop itself in isolation from the world. We must solidly promote high-level opening up, not only making good use of the global market and resources to develop ourselves, but also promoting common development of the world. We must hold high the banner of peace, development, cooperation and mutual benefit, always stand on the right side of history, practice true multilateralism and the common values of mankind, actively participate in the reform and development of the global governance system, and promote the development of an open world economy. We should promote the implementation of Global Development Initiative and Global Security Initiative, so as to add more stability and positive energy to world peace and development, and create a favorable international environment for our country's development.



各位代表！




Fellow deputies,



治国必先治党，党兴才能国强。推进强国建设，必须坚持中国共产党领导和党中央集中统一领导，切实加强党的建设。要时刻保持解决大党独有难题的清醒和坚定，勇于自我革命，一刻不停全面从严治党，坚定不移反对腐败，始终保持党的团结统一，确保党永远不变质、不变色、不变味，为强国建设、民族复兴提供坚强保证。




To do a good job of governing the country, the Party should do a good job of governing itself; and to build a great country, the Party must be thriving. To promote the building of a great country, it is essential to uphold the leadership of the CPC and the centralized, unified leadership of the CPC Central Committee, and to step up Party building in a solid manner. We must remain sober-minded and resolved about addressing the challenges unique to a big political party as ours, and have the courage to carry out self-reform. We must unceasingly exercise full and rigorous Party self-governance, unswervingly fight against corruption, and always maintain the unity and solidarity of the Party. By doing so, we will be able to ensure that the Party will never change its nature, its conviction, or its character, which will serve as a strong guarantee for building a great country and advancing national rejuvenation.



各位代表！




Fellow deputies,



强国建设、民族复兴的宏伟目标令人鼓舞，催人奋进。我们要只争朝夕，坚定历史自信，增强历史主动，坚持守正创新，保持战略定力，发扬斗争精神，勇于攻坚克难，不断为强国建设、民族复兴伟业添砖加瓦、增光添彩！




The grand goal of building a great country and achieving national rejuvenation is encouraging and motivating. We should seize the day, remain confident in our history, exhibit greater historical initiative, uphold fundamental principles and break new ground, maintain strategic resolve, carry forward the fighting spirit, and strive to overcome all difficulties, to contribute to the great cause of building China into a great country and achieving national rejuvenation.



谢谢大家！




Thank you.



3月20日，在赴莫斯科对俄罗斯联邦进行国事访问之际，国家主席习近平在《俄罗斯报》和俄新社网站发表题为《踔厉前行，开启中俄友好合作、共同发展新篇章》的署名文章。文章全文如下：




A signed article by Chinese President Xi Jinping titled "Forging Ahead to Open a New Chapter of China-Russia Friendship, Cooperation and Common Development" was published Monday on Russia's newspaper Russian Gazette and the website of RIA Novosti news agency ahead of his state visit to Russia. Following is an English version of the full text of the article:



踔厉前行，开启中俄友好合作、共同发展新篇章
中华人民共和国主席
习近平




Forging Ahead to Open a New Chapter of China-Russia Friendship, Cooperation and Common Development
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China



应普京总统邀请，我即将对俄罗斯联邦进行国事访问。10年前，我当选中国国家主席后，俄罗斯是我访问的首个国家。10年来，我8次到访俄罗斯，每次都乘兴而来，满载而归，同普京总统一道开启了中俄关系新篇章。




At the invitation of President Vladimir Putin, I will soon pay a state visit to the Russian Federation. Russia was the first country I visited after I was elected President 10 years ago. Over the past decade, I have made eight visits to Russia. I came each time with high expectations and returned with fruitful results, opening a new chapter for China-Russia relations together with President Putin.



中俄两国互为最大邻国和全面战略协作伙伴，同为世界主要大国和联合国安理会常任理事国。两国都奉行独立自主的外交政策，都将中俄关系置于本国外交优先方向。




China and Russia are each other's biggest neighbor and comprehensive strategic partner of coordination. We are both major countries in the world and permanent members of the UN Security Council. Both countries uphold an independent foreign policy and see our relationship as a high priority in our diplomacy.



中俄关系发展有着清晰的历史逻辑和强大的内生动力。10年来，双方各领域合作得到长足发展，阔步迈入新时代。




There is a clear historical logic and strong internal driving force for the growth of China-Russia relations. Over the past 10 years, we have come a long way in our wide-ranging cooperation and made significant strides into the new era.



——高层交往发挥重要战略引领作用。中俄两国建立了完备的高层交往和各领域合作机制，为两国关系发展提供了重要体制机制保障。这些年来，我同普京总统保持密切工作联系，在双边和国际场合先后40次会晤，为两国关系和各领域合作擘画蓝图，就共同关心的重大国际和地区问题及时沟通对表，为双边关系持续健康稳定发展牢牢定向把舵。




-- High-level interactions have played a key strategic role in leading China-Russia relations. We have established a whole set of mechanisms for high-level interactions and multi-faceted cooperation which provide important systemic and institutional safeguards for the growth of the bilateral ties. Over the years, I have maintained a close working relationship with President Putin. We have met 40 times on bilateral and international occasions. Together we have drawn the blueprint for the bilateral relations and cooperation in various fields, and have had timely communication on major international and regional issues of mutual interest, providing firm stewardship for the sustained, sound and stable growth of China-Russia relations.



——双方政治互信不断巩固，打造大国关系新范式。中俄双方秉持世代友好、合作共赢理念，坚持不结盟、不对抗、不针对第三方，坚定支持彼此走符合本国国情的发展道路，支持彼此发展振兴。两国关系在发展中愈加成熟、坚韧，不断焕发新的生机活力，树立起相互尊重、和平共处、合作共赢的新型大国关系典范。




-- Our two sides have cemented political mutual trust and fostered a new model of major-country relations. Guided by a vision of lasting friendship and win-win cooperation, China and Russia are committed to no-alliance, no-confrontation and not targeting any third party in developing our ties. We firmly support each other in following a development path suited to our respective national realities and support each other's development and rejuvenation. The bilateral relationship has grown more mature and resilient. It is brimming with new dynamism and vitality, setting a fine example for developing a new model of major-country relations featuring mutual respect, peaceful coexistence and win-win cooperation.



——双方形成全方位、多层次合作格局。在双方共同努力下，去年中俄双边贸易额突破1900亿美元，比10年前增长了116%，中国连续13年成为俄罗斯第一大贸易伙伴国。两国双向投资规模持续增长，能源、航空航天、互联互通等领域大项目合作稳步推进，科技创新、跨境电商等新兴领域合作势头强劲，地方合作方兴未艾，为两国民众带来实实在在的好处，也为双方各自发展振兴提供了源源不断的动力。




-- Our two sides have put in place an all-round and multi-tiered cooperation framework. Thanks to the joint efforts of both sides, China-Russia trade exceeded 190 billion U.S. dollars last year, up by 116 percent from ten years ago. China has been Russia's largest trading partner for 13 years running. We have seen steady increase in our two-way investment. Our cooperation on major projects in such fields as energy, aviation, space and connectivity is moving forward steadily. Our collaboration in scientific and technological innovation, cross-border e-commerce and other emerging areas is showing a strong momentum. Our cooperation at the sub-national level is also booming. All this has brought tangible benefits to both the Chinese and the Russian peoples and provided unceasing driving force for our respective development and rejuvenation.



——双方践行世代友好理念，传统友谊历久弥坚。双方隆重纪念《中俄睦邻友好合作条约》签署20周年，我同普京总统宣布《条约》延期并赋予其新的时代内涵。双方先后举办8个国家级主题年，续写友好合作新篇章。两国人民在抗击新冠疫情斗争中彼此支持，相互鼓劲，又一次见证“患难见真情”。




-- Our two sides have acted on the vision of lasting friendship and steadily strengthened our traditional friendship. On the occasion of commemorating the 20th anniversary of the China-Russia Treaty of Good-Neighborliness and Friendly Cooperation, President Putin and I announced the extension of the Treaty and added new dimensions to it. Our two sides have held eight "theme years" at the national level and continued to write new chapters for China-Russia friendship and cooperation. Our two peoples have stood by and rooted for each other in the fight against COVID, which once again proves that "a friend in need is a friend indeed."



——双方在国际舞台密切协作，履行大国责任担当。中俄坚定维护以联合国为核心的国际体系、以国际法为基础的国际秩序、以联合国宪章宗旨和原则为基础的国际关系基本准则，在联合国、上海合作组织、金砖国家、二十国集团等国际多边机制内密切沟通和协作，共同致力于推进世界多极化和国际关系民主化，积极践行真正的多边主义，弘扬全人类共同价值，倡导构建新型国际关系和人类命运共同体。




-- Our two sides have had close coordination on the international stage and fulfilled our responsibilities as major countries. China and Russia are firmly committed to safeguarding the UN-centered international system, the international order underpinned by international law, and the basic norms of international relations based on the purposes and principles of the UN Charter. We have stayed in close communication and coordination in the UN, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, BRICS, the G20 and other multilateral mechanisms, and worked together for a multi-polar world and greater democracy in international relations. We have been active in practicing true multilateralism, promoting the common values of humanity, and championing the building of a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind.



中俄关系已经走过70余年风风雨雨。抚今追昔，我们深深感受到，今天的中俄关系来之不易，中俄友谊历久弥新，必须倍加珍惜。历史和实践告诉我们，中俄关系之所以能够经受住国际风云变幻考验，关键在于找到了国与国正确相处之道。




Looking back on the extraordinary journey of China-Russia relations over the past 70 years and more, we feel strongly that our relationship has not reached easily where it is today, and that our friendship is growing steadily and must be cherished by us all. China and Russia have found a right path of state-to-state interactions. This is essential for the relationship to stand the test of changing international circumstances, a lesson borne out by both history and reality.



我即将对俄罗斯的访问，是一次友谊之旅、合作之旅、和平之旅。我期待同普京总统一道，共同擘画未来一个时期中俄全面战略协作伙伴关系发展新愿景、新蓝图、新举措。




My upcoming visit to Russia will be a journey of friendship, cooperation and peace. I look forward to working with President Putin to jointly adopt a new vision, a new blueprint and new measures for the growth of China-Russia comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination in the years to come.



双方要加强统筹规划，聚焦两国各自发展振兴事业，开拓新思路，创造新机遇，增添新动力。要增进互信，激发潜能，始终保持中俄关系高水平运行。




To this end, our two sides need to enhance coordination and planning. As we focus on our respective cause of development and rejuvenation, we should get creative in our thinking, create new opportunities and inject new impetus. It is important that we increase mutual trust and bring out the potential of bilateral cooperation to keep China-Russia relations at a high level.



要推动投资经贸合作量质齐升，加强政策协调，为两国投资合作高质量发展创造有利条件。扩大双边贸易规模，打造更多利益契合点和合作增长点，形成传统贸易和新兴合作互为补充、同步发展格局。持续推进共建“一带一路”同欧亚经济联盟对接合作，为双边和区域合作提供更多制度性安排。




Our two sides need to raise both the quality and quantity of investment and economic cooperation and step up policy coordination to create favorable conditions for the high-quality development of our investment cooperation. We need to boost two-way trade, foster more convergence of interests and areas of cooperation, and promote the complementary and synchronized development of traditional trade and emerging areas of cooperation. We need to make sustained efforts to synergize the Belt and Road Initiative and the Eurasian Economic Union, so as to provide more institutional support for bilateral and regional cooperation.



要密切人文交流，办好中俄体育交流年。用好地方合作机制，推动两国友好省州、友城积极开展对口交往，鼓励双方人员往来，积极恢复两国旅游合作。开展好夏令营、联合办学等活动，不断增进两国民众特别是青少年相互了解和友谊。




Our two sides need to step up people-to-people and cultural exchanges and ensure the success of China-Russia Years of Sports Exchange. We should make good use of the sub-national cooperation mechanisms to facilitate more interactions between sister provinces/states and cities. We should encourage personnel exchanges and push for the resumption of tourism cooperation. We should make available better summer camps, jointly-run schools and other programs to steadily enhance the mutual understanding and friendship between our peoples, especially between the youth.



当今世界正处于百年未有之大变局。和平、发展、合作、共赢的历史潮流不可阻挡，世界多极化、经济全球化、国际关系民主化大势不可逆转。同时，传统与非传统安全挑战错综交织，霸权霸道霸凌行径危害深重，世界经济复苏道阻且长。国际社会忧心忡忡，亟盼驱散危机的合作良方。




The world today is going through profound changes unseen in a century. The historical trend of peace, development and win-win cooperation is unstoppable. The prevailing trends of world multi-polarity, economic globalization and greater democracy in international relations are irreversible. On the other hand, our world is confronted with complex and intertwined traditional and non-traditional security challenges, damaging acts of hegemony, domination and bullying, and long and tortuous global economic recovery. Countries around the world are deeply concerned and eager to find a cooperative way out of the crisis.



2013年3月，我在莫斯科国际关系学院发表演讲，提出各国相互联系、相互依存的程度空前加深，人类生活在同一个地球村里，越来越成为你中有我、我中有你的命运共同体。此后，我又相继提出共建“一带一路”倡议、全球发展倡议、全球安全倡议、全球文明倡议，丰富了人类命运共同体理念的内涵和实践路径，为应对世界之变、时代之变、历史之变提供了中国方案。




In March 2013, when speaking at the Moscow State Institute of International Relations, I observed that countries are linked with and dependent on one another at a level never seen before, and that mankind, living in the same global village, have increasingly emerged as a community with a shared future in which everyone's interests are closely entwined. Since then, I have proposed the Belt and Road Initiative, the Global Development Initiative, the Global Security Initiative, and the Global Civilization Initiative on different occasions. All these have enriched our vision for a community with a shared future for mankind and provided practical pathways toward it. They are part of China's response to the changes of the world, of our times, and of the historic trajectory.



10年来，和平、发展、公平、正义、民主、自由的全人类共同价值日益深入人心，建设持久和平、普遍安全、共同繁荣、开放包容、清洁美丽的世界，成为越来越多国家的共同追求。国际社会清楚地认识到，世界上不存在高人一等的国家，不存在放之四海而皆准的国家治理模式，不存在由某个国家说了算的国际秩序。一个团结而非分裂、和平而非动荡的世界符合全人类共同利益。




Through these ten years, the common values of humanity -- peace, development, equity, justice, democracy and freedom -- have taken deeper roots in the heart of the people. An open, inclusive, clean and beautiful world with lasting peace, universal security and common prosperity has become the shared aspiration of more and more countries. The international community has recognized that no country is superior to others, no model of governance is universal, and no single country should dictate the international order. The common interest of all humankind is in a world that is united and peaceful, rather than divided and volatile.



去年以来，乌克兰危机全面升级。中方始终着眼事情本身的是非曲直，秉持客观公正立场，积极劝和促谈。我相继提出多项主张，包括应该遵守联合国宪章宗旨和原则，尊重各国合理安全关切，支持一切致力于和平解决乌克兰危机的努力，确保全球产业链供应链稳定等，成为中方处理乌克兰危机的根本遵循。前不久，中国发布《关于政治解决乌克兰危机的中国立场》文件，吸纳了各方合理关切，体现了国际社会在乌克兰危机问题上的最大公约数，为缓解危机外溢、推动政治解决发挥了建设性作用。复杂问题没有简单解决办法。我们相信，只要各方秉持共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，坚持平等、理性、务实对话协商，就一定能找到解决乌克兰危机的合理途径，找到实现世界持久和平、普遍安全的光明大道。




Since last year, there has been an all-round escalation of the Ukraine crisis. China has all along upheld an objective and impartial position based on the merits of the issue, and actively promoted peace talks. I have put forth several proposals, i.e., observing the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, respect of the legitimate security concerns of all countries, supporting all efforts conducive to the peaceful settlement of the crisis, and ensuring the stability of global industrial and supply chains. They have become China's fundamental principles for addressing the Ukraine crisis.



Not long ago, we released China's Position on the Political Settlement of the Ukraine Crisis, which takes into account the legitimate concerns of all parties and reflects the broadest common understanding of the international community on the crisis. It has been constructive in mitigating the spillovers of the crisis and facilitating its political settlement. There is no simple solution to a complex issue. We believe that as long as all parties embrace the vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, and pursue equal-footed, rational and results-oriented dialogue and consultation, they will find a reasonable way to resolve the crisis as well as a broad path toward a world of lasting peace and common security.



要办好世界上的事，首先要办好自己的事。中国人民正在中国共产党领导下团结奋斗，以中国式现代化全面推进中华民族伟大复兴。中国式现代化，概括起来说，就是人口规模巨大的现代化、全体人民共同富裕的现代化、物质文明和精神文明相协调的现代化、人与自然和谐共生的现代化、走和平发展道路的现代化。这些中国特色凝结着我们长期以来的实践探索，体现着我们对国际经验的深刻总结。未来，我们将坚定不移推进中国式现代化事业，努力实现高质量发展，扩大高水平对外开放，相信这将为包括俄罗斯在内的世界各国提供新的发展机遇。




To run the world's affairs well, one must first and foremost run its own affairs well. The Chinese people, under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, are striving in unity to advance the rejuvenation of the Chinese nation on all fronts through the Chinese path to modernization. Chinese modernization is characterized by the following features: it is the modernization of a huge population, the modernization of common prosperity for all, the modernization of material and cultural-ethical advancement, the modernization of harmony between humanity and nature, and the modernization of peaceful development. These distinctive Chinese features are the crystallization of our practices and explorations over the years, and reflect our profound understanding of international experience. Going forward, we will steadfastly advance the cause of Chinese modernization, strive to realize high-quality development, and expand high-standard opening up. I believe that this will bring new development opportunities to Russia and all countries in the world.



一年春作首，万事行为先。我们有理由期待，作为发展振兴道路上的同道人，中俄两国必将为人类文明进步作出新的更大贡献。




Just as every new year starts with spring, every success starts with actions. We have every reason to expect that China and Russia, as fellow travelers on the journey of development and rejuvenation, will make new and greater contributions to human advancement. 

一、背景




I. Background



安全问题事关各国人民的福祉，事关世界和平与发展的崇高事业，事关人类的前途命运。




The issue of security bears on the well-being of people of all countries, the lofty cause of world peace and development, and the future of humanity.



当前，世界之变、时代之变、历史之变正以前所未有的方式展开，国际社会正经历罕见的多重风险挑战。地区安全热点问题此起彼伏，局部冲突和动荡频发，新冠疫情延宕蔓延，单边主义、保护主义明显上升，各种传统和非传统安全威胁交织叠加。和平赤字、发展赤字、安全赤字、治理赤字加重，世界又一次站在历史的十字路口。




Today, our world, our times and history are changing in ways like never before, and the international community is confronted with multiple risks and challenges rarely seen before. Regional security hotspots keep flaring up, local conflicts and turbulence occur frequently, the COVID-19 pandemic persists, unilateralism and protectionism have risen significantly, and traditional and non-traditional security threats are entwined. The deficits in peace, development, security and governance are growing, and the world is once again at a crossroads in history.



我们所处的是一个充满挑战的时代，也是一个充满希望的时代。我们深信，和平、发展、合作、共赢的历史潮流不可阻挡。维护国际和平安全、促进全球发展繁荣，应该成为世界各国的共同追求。中国国家主席习近平提出全球安全倡议，倡导以团结精神适应深刻调整的国际格局，以共赢思维应对复杂交织的安全挑战，旨在消弭国际冲突根源、完善全球安全治理，推动国际社会携手为动荡变化的时代注入更多稳定性和确定性，实现世界持久和平与发展。




This is an era rife with challenges. It is also one brimming with hope. We are convinced that the historical trends of peace, development and win-win cooperation are unstoppable. Upholding world peace and security and promoting global development and prosperity should be the common pursuit of all countries. Chinese President Xi Jinping has proposed the Global Security Initiative (GSI), calling on countries to adapt to the profoundly changing international landscape in the spirit of solidarity, and address the complex and intertwined security challenges with a win-win mindset. The GSI aims to eliminate the root causes of international conflicts, improve global security governance, encourage joint international efforts to bring more stability and certainty to a volatile and changing era, and promote durable peace and development in the world. 



二、核心理念与原则




II. Core concepts and principles



（一）坚持共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观。习近平主席2014年首次提出共同、综合、合作、可持续的新安全观，赢得国际社会普遍响应和广泛认同。这一安全观的核心内涵，就是主张秉持共同安全理念，尊重和保障每一个国家的安全；主张重视综合施策，统筹维护传统领域和非传统领域安全，协调推进安全治理；主张坚持合作之道，通过政治对话、和平谈判来实现安全；主张寻求可持续安全，通过发展化解矛盾，消除不安全的土壤。我们认为，只有基于道义和正确理念的安全，才是基础牢固、真正持久的安全。




1. Stay committed to the vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. In 2014, President Xi Jinping initiated a new vision for common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, which has been widely recognized and supported by the international community. The essence of this new vision of security is to advocate a concept of common security, respecting and safeguarding the security of every country; a holistic approach, maintaining security in both traditional and non-traditional domains and enhancing security governance in a coordinated way; a commitment to cooperation, bringing about security through political dialogue and peaceful negotiation; and pursuit of sustainable security, resolving conflicts through development and eliminating the breeding ground for insecurity. We believe security will only be firmly established and sustainable when it is underpinned by morality, justice and the right ideas.



（二）坚持尊重各国主权、领土完整。主权平等和不干涉内政是国际法基本原则和现代国际关系最根本准则。我们主张国家不分大小、强弱、贫富，都是国际社会的平等一员，各国内政不容干涉，主权和尊严必须得到尊重，自主选择发展道路和社会制度的权利必须得到维护。应坚持主权独立平等，推动各国权利平等、规则平等、机会平等。




2. Stay committed to respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries. Sovereign equality and non-interference in internal affairs are basic principles of international law and the most fundamental norms governing contemporary international relations. We believe all countries, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, are equal members of the international community. Their internal affairs brook no external interference, their sovereignty and dignity must be respected, and their right to independently choose social systems and development paths must be upheld. Sovereign independence and equality must be upheld, and efforts should be made for all countries to enjoy equality in terms of rights, rules and opportunities.



（三）坚持遵守联合国宪章宗旨和原则。联合国宪章宗旨和原则承载着世界人民对两次世界大战惨痛教训的深刻反思，凝结了人类实现集体安全、永久和平的制度设计。当今世界发生的各种对抗和不公，不是因为联合国宪章宗旨和原则过时了，而是由于其未能得到有效维护和履行。我们呼吁共同践行真正的多边主义，坚定维护以联合国为核心的国际体系、以国际法为基础的国际秩序、以联合国宪章宗旨和原则为基础的国际关系基本准则，维护联合国权威及其在全球安全治理中的主要平台地位。冷战思维、单边主义、阵营对抗、霸权主义与联合国宪章精神相违背，应当受到抵制和反对。




3. Stay committed to abiding by the purposes and principles of the UN Charter. The purposes and principles of the UN Charter embody the deep reflection by people around the world on the bitter lessons of the two world wars. They are humanity's institutional design for collective security and lasting peace. The various confrontations and injustices in the world today did not occur because the purposes and principles of the UN Charter are outdated, but because they are not effectively maintained and implemented. We call on all countries to practice true multilateralism; firmly uphold the international system with the UN at its core, the international order underpinned by international law and the basic norms of international relations underpinned by the UN Charter; and uphold the authority of the UN and its status as the main platform for global security governance. The Cold War mentality, unilateralism, bloc confrontation and hegemonism contradict the spirit of the UN Charter and must be resisted and rejected. 



（四）坚持重视各国合理安全关切。人类是不可分割的安全共同体，一国安全不应以损害他国安全为代价。我们认为，各国安全利益都是彼此平等的。任何国家的正当合理安全关切都应得到重视和妥善解决，不应被长期忽视和系统性侵犯。任何国家在谋求自身安全时都应兼顾其他国家合理安全关切。我们主张秉持安全不可分割原则，倡导自身安全与共同安全不可分割，传统安全与非传统安全不可分割，安全权利与安全义务不可分割，安全与发展不可分割，构建均衡、有效、可持续的安全架构，从而实现普遍安全、共同安全。




4. Stay committed to taking the legitimate security concerns of all countries seriously. Humanity is an indivisible security community. Security of one country should not come at the expense of that of others. We believe all countries are equal in terms of security interests. The legitimate and reasonable security concerns of all countries should be taken seriously and addressed properly, not persistently ignored or systemically challenged. Any country, while pursuing its own security, should take into account the reasonable security concerns of others. We uphold the principle of indivisible security, advocating the indivisibility between individual security and common security, between traditional security and non-traditional security, between security rights and security obligations, and between security and development. There should be a balanced, effective and sustainable security architecture, so as to realize universal security and common security.



（五）坚持通过对话协商以和平方式解决国家间的分歧和争端。战争和制裁不是解决争端的根本之道，对话协商才是化解分歧的有效途径。我们呼吁加强国家间战略沟通，增进安全互信，化解矛盾，管控分歧，消除危机产生的根源。大国应坚持公道正义，承担应尽责任，支持平等协商，根据当事国需要和愿望劝和促谈、斡旋调停。国际社会应支持一切有利于和平解决危机的努力，鼓励冲突各方以对话建互信、解纷争、促安全。滥用单边制裁和“长臂管辖”不但解决不了问题，反而会制造更多困难和复杂因素。




5. Stay committed to peacefully resolving differences and disputes between countries through dialogue and consultation. War and sanctions are no fundamental solution to disputes; only dialogue and consultation are effective in resolving differences. We call on countries to strengthen strategic communication, enhance mutual security confidence, diffuse tensions, manage differences and eliminate the root causes of crises. Major countries must uphold justice, fulfill their due responsibilities, support consultation on an equal footing, and facilitate talks for peace, play good offices and mediate in light of the needs and will of the countries concerned. The international community should support all efforts conducive to the peaceful settlement of crises, and encourage conflicting parties to build trust, settle disputes and promote security through dialogue. Abusing unilateral sanctions and long-arm jurisdiction does not solve a problem, but only creates more difficulties and complications.



（六）坚持统筹维护传统领域和非传统领域安全。当前，安全的内涵和外延更加丰富，呈现更加突出的联动性、跨国性、多样性，传统安全威胁和非传统安全威胁相互交织。我们倡导各国践行共商共建共享的全球治理观，共同应对地区争端和恐怖主义、气候变化、网络安全、生物安全等全球性问题，多管齐下、综合施策，完善规则，携手寻求长远解决之道，推进全球安全治理，防范化解安全困境。




6. Stay committed to maintaining security in both traditional and non-traditional domains. In today's world, both the intension and extension of security are broadening. Security is more interconnected, transnational and diverse. Traditional and non-traditional security threats have become intertwined. We encourage all countries to practice the principles of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits in global governance, and work together to address regional disputes and global challenges such as terrorism, climate change, cybersecurity and biosecurity. There should be concerted efforts to explore multiple channels, develop a holistic solution, and improve relevant rules, so as to find sustainable solutions, promote global security governance and prevent and resolve security challenges.



上述“六个坚持”彼此联系、相互呼应，是辩证统一的有机整体。其中，坚持共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观是理念指引，坚持尊重各国主权、领土完整是基本前提，坚持遵守联合国宪章宗旨和原则是根本遵循，坚持重视各国合理安全关切是重要原则，坚持通过对话协商以和平方式解决国家间的分歧和争端是必由之路，坚持统筹维护传统领域和非传统领域安全是应有之义。




These six commitments are interlinked and mutually reinforcing, and are an organic whole of dialectical unity. Among them, the vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security provides conceptual guidance; respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries is the basic premise; abiding by the purposes and principles of the UN Charter is a primary benchmark; taking the legitimate security concerns of all countries seriously is an important principle, peacefully resolving differences and disputes between countries through dialogue and consultation is a must choice; and maintaining security in both traditional and non-traditional domains is an inherent requirement.



三、重点合作方向




III. Priorities of cooperation



实现世界持久和平，让每一个国家享有和平稳定的外部环境，让每一个国家的人民都能安居乐业，人民权利得到充分保障，是我们的共同愿望。各国需要同舟共济、团结协作，构建人类安全共同体，携手建设一个远离恐惧、普遍安全的世界。




It is our common aspiration to achieve lasting world peace, so that all countries can enjoy a peaceful and stable external environment and their people can live a happy life with their rights fully guaranteed. Like passengers aboard the same ship, countries need to work in solidarity to foster a community of shared security for mankind and build a world that is free from fear and enjoys universal security. 



为实现上述愿景，中方将在全球安全倡议框架下开展与世界各国和国际、地区组织的双多边安全合作，积极推进安全理念对接和利益共融。我们倡导各方在包括但不限于以下方面积极开展单项或多项合作，与中方的努力互补互促，共同促进世界和平安宁。




To realize these visions, China is ready to conduct bilateral and multilateral security cooperation with all countries and international and regional organizations under the framework of the Global Security Initiative, and actively promote coordination of security concepts and convergence of interests. China calls on all parties to carry out single or multiple cooperation in aspects including but not limited to the following ones, so as to pursue mutual learning and complementarity and to jointly promote world peace and tranquility:



（一）积极参与联合国秘书长“我们的共同议程”报告关于制定“新和平纲领”等建议的工作。支持联合国加大预防冲突努力，充分发挥建设和平架构的作用，帮助冲突后国家开展建设和平工作。进一步发挥中国－联合国和平与发展基金秘书长和平与安全子基金作用，支持联合国在全球安全事务中发挥更大作用。




1. Actively participate in formulating a New Agenda for Peace and other proposals put forth in Our Common Agenda by the UN Secretary-General. Support UN efforts to enhance conflict prevention and fully harness the peace-building architecture to assist post-conflict states in peace-building. Further leverage the Secretary-General's Peace and Security Sub-Fund of the China-UN Peace and Development Trust Fund and support a bigger UN role in global security affairs.

支持联合国提高维和行动履行授权能力，坚持当事方同意、保持中立、非自卫或履行授权不使用武力的维和行动三原则，坚持政治优先，综合施策，标本兼治。维和行动应获得充足资源，支持为非盟自主和平行动提供充足、可预测、可持续的资金支持。




Support the UN in enhancing capacity for implementing its peacekeeping mandate, uphold the three principles of "consent of the parties, impartiality, and non-use of force except in self-defense and defense of the mandate" for peacekeeping operations, prioritize political solutions, and take a holistic approach to address both symptoms and root causes. Provide peacekeeping operations with adequate resources. Support the provision of sufficient, predictable and sustainable financial assistance to the African Union (AU) for it to carry out autonomous peacekeeping operations.



（二）促进大国协调和良性互动，推动构建和平共处、总体稳定、均衡发展的大国关系格局。大国在维护国际和平与安全上承担特殊重要责任。倡导大国带头讲平等、讲诚信、讲合作、讲法治，带头遵守《联合国宪章》和国际法。坚持相互尊重、和平共处、合作共赢，坚守不冲突不对抗的底线，求同存异、管控分歧。




2. Promote coordination and sound interaction among major countries and build a major country relationship featuring peaceful coexistence, overall stability and balanced development. Major countries shoulder particularly important responsibilities of maintaining international peace and security. Call on major countries to lead by example in honoring equality, good faith, cooperation and the rule of law, and in complying with the UN Charter and international law. Adhere to mutual respect, peaceful coexistence and win-win cooperation, stick to the bottom line of no conflict and no confrontation, seek common ground while reserving differences, and manage differences. 



（三）坚决维护“核战争打不赢也打不得”共识。遵守2022年1月五核国领导人发表的《关于防止核战争与避免军备竞赛的联合声明》，加强核武器国家对话合作，降低核战争风险。维护以《不扩散核武器条约》为基石的国际核不扩散体系，积极支持有关地区国家建立无核武器区。促进核安全国际合作，建立公平、合作、共赢的国际核安全体系。




3. Firmly uphold the consensus that "a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be fought". Comply with the joint statement on preventing nuclear war and avoiding arms races issued by leaders of the five nuclear-weapon states in January 2022. Strengthen dialogue and cooperation among nuclear-weapon states to reduce the risk of nuclear war. Safeguard the international nuclear non-proliferation regime based on the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and actively support the efforts of countries in relevant regions to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones. Promote international cooperation on nuclear security, so as to build a fair, collaborative and mutually beneficial international nuclear security system.



（四）全面落实第76届联大通过的“在国际安全领域促进和平利用国际合作”决议。




4. Fully implement the resolution of Promoting International Cooperation on Peaceful Uses in the Context of International Security adopted by the 76th session of the UN General Assembly.



在联合国安理会防扩散委员会、《禁止化学武器公约》、《禁止生物武器公约》等框架下开展合作，推动全面禁止和彻底销毁大规模杀伤性武器，提升各国防扩散出口管制、生物安全、化武防护等方面能力水平。




Carry out cooperation under such frameworks as the UN Security Council's 1540 Committee, the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), promote complete prohibition and thorough destruction of weapons of mass destruction, and build up the capacity of all countries in areas including non-proliferation export control, biosecurity and protection against chemical weapons.



支持全球常规武器军控进程。支持在尊重非洲国家意愿的前提下开展中国、非洲、欧洲轻小武器管控合作，支持落实“消弭非洲枪声”倡议。积极开展人道主义扫雷国际合作及援助，为雷患国家提供更多力所能及的帮助。




Support the process of global conventional arms control. Support cooperation among China, Africa and Europe on small arms and light weapons control under the premise of respecting the will of Africa. Support the implementation of the initiative of Silencing the Guns in Africa. Actively carry out international cooperation and assistance on humanitarian demining and provide help to affected countries as much as one's ability permits.



（五）推动政治解决国际和地区热点问题。鼓励当事国坚持通过坦诚对话沟通，化解分歧，寻求热点问题的解决之道。支持国际社会在不干涉内政前提下，以劝和促谈为主要方式，以公平务实为主要态度，以标本兼治为主要思路，建设性参与热点问题政治解决。支持通过对话谈判政治解决乌克兰危机等热点问题。




5. Promote political settlement of international and regional hotspot issues. Encourage the countries concerned to overcome differences and resolve hotspots through candid dialogue and communication. Support the international community in constructively participating in the political settlement of hotspots, under the premise of non-interference in internal affairs, mainly through the means of facilitating peace talks, with fairness and practicality as the main attitude, and mainly following the approach of addressing both symptoms and root causes. Support political settlement of hotspot issues such as the Ukraine crisis through dialogue and negotiation.



（六）支持和完善以东盟为中心的地区安全合作机制和架构，秉持协商一致、照顾各方舒适度等“东盟方式”，加强地区国家间的安全对话与合作。支持在澜沧江－湄公河合作框架下推进非传统安全领域合作，通过澜湄合作专项基金实施相关合作项目，努力打造全球安全倡议实验区，共同维护地区和平稳定。




6. Support and improve the ASEAN-centered regional security cooperation mechanism and architecture, and adhere to the ASEAN way of consensus-building and accommodating each other's comfort level to further strengthen security dialogue and cooperation among regional countries. Support efforts to promote cooperation in non-traditional security areas under the framework of Lancang-Mekong Cooperation (LMC), implement relevant cooperation projects under the LMC Special Fund, and strive to foster a pilot zone for GSI to jointly safeguard regional peace and stability.



（七）落实实现中东安全稳定的五点倡议，倡导相互尊重，坚持公平正义，实现核不扩散，共建集体安全，加快发展合作，共同推动构建中东安全新架构。支持中东国家加强对话、改善关系的积极势头和努力，照顾各方合理安全关切，壮大维护地区安全的内生力量，支持阿拉伯国家联盟等区域组织为此发挥建设性作用。国际社会应采取实际步骤推进巴勒斯坦问题“两国方案”，召开更大规模、更有权威、更有影响的国际和会，推动巴勒斯坦问题早日得到公正解决。




7. Implement the five-point proposal on realizing peace and stability in the Middle East, including advocating mutual respect, upholding equity and justice, realizing non-proliferation, jointly fostering collective security, and accelerating development cooperation, so as to jointly establish a new security framework in the Middle East. Support the positive momentum and the efforts of Middle East countries to strengthen dialogue and improve their relations, accommodate the reasonable security concerns of all parties, strengthen the internal forces of safeguarding regional security, and support the League of Arab States (LAS) and other regional organizations in playing a constructive role in this regard. The international community should take practical steps to advance the two-state solution to the Palestinian question, and convene a larger, more authoritative and more influential international peace conference, so as to achieve a just solution to the Palestinian question at an early date. 



（八）支持非洲国家、非洲联盟、次区域组织为解决地区冲突、反对恐怖主义、维护海上安全所作努力，呼吁国际社会向非洲主导的反恐行动提供资金和技术，支持非洲国家增强自主维护和平的能力。支持以非洲方式解决非洲问题，推动非洲之角以及萨赫勒、大湖地区等热点问题和平解决。积极落实“非洲之角和平发展构想”，推动非洲之角和平会议机制化，积极打造合作示范项目。




8. Support the efforts of African countries, the AU and sub-regional organizations to resolve regional conflicts, fight terrorism and safeguard maritime security, call on the international community to provide financial and technical support to Africa-led counter-terrorism operations, and support African countries in strengthening their ability to safeguard peace independently. Support addressing African problems in the African way, and promote peaceful settlement of hotspots in the Horn of Africa, the Sahel, the Great Lakes region and other areas. Actively implement the Outlook on Peace and Development in the Horn of Africa, promote the institutionalization of the China-Horn of Africa Peace, Governance and Development Conference, and work actively to launch pilot projects of cooperation.



（九）支持拉美和加勒比国家积极践行《宣布拉美和加勒比为和平区的公告》承诺，支持包括拉共体在内的区域和次区域组织为维护地区和平安全、妥善处理地区热点问题发挥积极作用。




9. Support Latin American and Caribbean countries in actively fulfilling commitments stated in the Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace, and support the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States and other regional and sub-regional organizations in playing an active role in upholding regional peace and security and properly handling regional hotspots. 



（十）重视太平洋岛国在气候变化、自然灾害和公共卫生等领域特殊处境和合理关切，支持太平洋岛国为应对全球性挑战所作努力，支持岛国落实其《蓝色太平洋2050战略》。加大提供物资、资金和人才支持，帮助岛国提升应对非传统安全威胁的能力。




10. Pay high attention to the special situation and legitimate concerns of Pacific island countries in regard to climate change, natural disasters and public health, support the efforts of Pacific island countries to address global challenges, and support island countries in implementing the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent. Increase the provision of materials, funds and talents to help island countries improve their ability to deal with non-traditional security threats. 



（十一）加强海上对话交流和务实合作，妥善处理海上分歧，携手打击海盗、武装抢劫等海上跨国犯罪，合力维护海洋和平安宁和航道安全。倡导跨境河流上下游国家积极开展国际合作，通过对话协商解决相关争议，保障跨境河流航运安全，合理利用和保护水资源，保护跨境河流生态环境。




11. Strengthen maritime dialogue and exchange and practical cooperation, properly handle maritime differences, and work together to tackle transnational crimes at sea including piracy and armed robbery, so as to jointly safeguard maritime peace and tranquility and sea lane security. Call on upstream and downstream countries along trans-boundary rivers to actively engage in international cooperation, resolve relevant disputes through dialogue and consultation, ensure the safety of shipping on trans-boundary rivers, rationally utilize and protect water resources, and protect the ecological environment of trans-boundary rivers. 



（十二）加强联合国在国际反恐斗争中的中心协调作用，支持国际社会全面落实联大和安理会反恐决议及《联合国全球反恐战略》，共同打击所有被安理会列名的恐怖组织和人员。推动全球反恐资源进一步向发展中国家倾斜，加大发展中国家反恐能力建设。反对将恐怖主义与特定国家、民族和宗教挂钩。深入研究和应对新兴技术对国际反恐斗争的影响。




12. Strengthen the UN's role as the central coordinator in the global fight against terrorism, support the international community in fully implementing the UN General Assembly and Security Council counter-terrorism resolutions and the UN Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and jointly crack down on all terrorist organizations and individuals designated by the Security Council. Channel more global counter-terrorism resources to developing countries to enhance their counter-terrorism capacity building. Oppose linking terrorism with any particular country, ethnic group or religion. Enhance studies on and responses to the impact of emerging technologies on global counter-terrorism efforts.



（十三）深化信息安全领域国际合作。中方已提出《全球数据安全倡议》，希望推动达成反映各方意愿、尊重各方利益的全球数字治理规则。持续推进落实《中国－阿拉伯联盟数据安全合作倡议》和《“中国+中亚五国”数据安全合作倡议》，共同应对各类网络威胁，构建开放包容、公平合理、安全稳定、富有生机活力的全球网络空间治理体系。




13. Deepen international cooperation in the field of information security. China has put forward the Global Initiative on Data Security and calls for joint efforts to formulate global rules on digital governance that reflect the will and respect the interests of all parties. Follow through on the China-LAS Cooperation Initiative on Data Security and the Data Security Cooperation Initiative of China+Central Asia, jointly address various cyber threats, and work to establish a global governance system on cyberspace featuring openness and inclusion, justice and fairness, security and stability, vigor and vitality.



（十四）加强生物安全风险管理。共同倡导负责任的生物科研，鼓励各利益攸关方自愿采纳《科学家生物安全行为准则天津指南》。共同加强实验室生物安全能力建设，降低生物安全风险，促进生物科技健康发展。




14. Strengthen biosecurity risk management. Jointly advocate responsible bioscience research and encourage all stakeholders to refer to the Tianjin Biosecurity Guidelines for Codes of Conduct for Scientists on a voluntary basis. Jointly strengthen the building of biosecurity capability of laboratories, reduce biosecurity risks and promote the healthy development of biotechnology.



（十五）加强人工智能等新兴科技领域国际安全治理，预防和管控潜在安全风险。中国已就人工智能军事应用和伦理治理发布立场文件，愿与国际社会就人工智能安全治理加强沟通交流，推动达成普遍参与的国际机制，形成具有广泛共识的治理框架和标准规范。




15. Strengthen international security governance on artificial intelligence (AI) and other emerging technologies, and prevent and manage potential security risks. China has issued position papers on regulating military applications and strengthening ethical governance of AI, and stands ready to strengthen communication and exchange with the international community on AI security governance, promote the establishment of an international mechanism with broad participation, and develop governance frameworks, standards and norms based on extensive consensus.



（十六）加强外空领域国际合作，维护以国际法为基础的外空国际秩序。基于国际法开展外空活动，维护在轨航天员的安全和空间设施的长期可持续。尊重并确保各国平等享有和平利用外空的权利。坚决反对外空武器化和军备竞赛，支持谈判缔结外空军控国际法律文书。




16. Strengthen international cooperation on outer space and safeguard the international order in outer space underpinned by international law. Carry out activities in outer space in accordance with international law, safeguard the safety of in-orbit astronauts and the long-term and sustainable operation of space facilities. Respect and ensure the equal right of all countries to use outer space peacefully. Resolutely reject the weaponization of and arms race in outer space, and support the negotiation and conclusion of an international legal instrument on arms control in outer space.



（十七）支持世界卫生组织在全球公共卫生治理中发挥领导作用，有效统筹、调动全球资源，共同应对包括新型冠状病毒感染在内的全球性重大传染病。




17. Support the World Health Organization in playing a leading role in global governance in public health, and effectively coordinate and mobilize global resources to jointly respond to COVID-19 and other major global infectious diseases.



（十八）维护全球粮食和能源安全。加强行动协调，维护国际农产品贸易平稳运行，保障粮食生产和供应链畅通，避免将粮食安全问题政治化、武器化。加强国际能源政策协调，为保障能源运输创造安全稳定环境，共同维护全球能源市场和能源价格稳定。




18. Safeguard global food and energy security. Strengthen action coordination to maintain the smooth operation of international agricultural trade, ensure stable grain production and smooth supply chains, and avoid politicizing and weaponizing food security issues. Strengthen international energy policy coordination, create a safe and stable environment for ensuring energy transportation, and jointly maintain the stability of the global energy market and energy prices.



（十九）全面、有效落实《联合国打击跨国有组织犯罪公约》。鼓励各国为打击跨国犯罪，缔结或参加有关国际条约、公约或协议，或者作出制度性安排。支持联合国三项禁毒公约，维护国际禁毒体制，倡导国际社会协调一致、责任共担、真诚合作，共同应对毒品问题带来的挑战，构建不受毒品危害的人类命运共同体。在尊重各国主权基础上积极开展执法合作，共同提升执法能力和安全治理水平。支持建立全球培训体系，为发展中国家培训更多适应维护自身安全需要的执法人员。




19. Fully and effectively implement the UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. Encourage all countries to conclude or join international treaties, conventions or agreements or make institutional arrangements to fight transnational crimes. Support the three international drug control conventions of the UN, safeguard the international drug control system, and advocate coordination, shared responsibility and sincere cooperation in the international community to jointly address challenges posed by the drug problem and build a community with a shared future for mankind that is free from the harm of drugs. Actively conduct law enforcement cooperation on the basis of respecting each country's sovereignty, so as to jointly improve law enforcement capacity and security governance. Support the establishment of a global training system to train for developing countries more law enforcement officers who are responsive to their countries' security needs. 



（二十）支持各国在气候变化、供应链产业链稳定畅通等领域合作，加快落实联合国2030年可持续发展议程，以可持续发展促进可持续安全。




20. Support the cooperation among countries in addressing climate change and maintaining stable and smooth supply and industrial chains, and speed up the implementation of the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in order to promote sustainable security through sustainable development.



四、合作平台和机制




IV. Platforms and mechanisms of cooperation



（一）利用联合国大会和各相关委员会、安理会、相关机构以及其他有关国际和地区组织等平台，根据各自职责，围绕和平与安全问题广泛讨论沟通，提出共同倡议主张，汇聚国际社会应对安全挑战共识。




1. Engage in wide-ranging discussions and communication on peace and security at the General Assembly, relevant UN Committees, the Security Council, relevant institutions, and other international and regional organizations based on their respective mandates, and put forward common initiatives and propositions to forge consensus in the international community to address security challenges. 



（二）发挥上海合作组织、金砖合作、亚信、“中国+中亚五国”、东亚合作相关机制等作用，围绕彼此一致或相近目标逐步开展安全合作。推动设立海湾地区多边对话平台，发挥阿富汗邻国外长会、非洲之角和平会议等协调合作机制作用，促进地区乃至世界的和平稳定。




2. Leverage the roles of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, BRICS cooperation, the Conference on Interaction and Confidence Building Measures in Asia, the "China+Central Asia" mechanism, and relevant mechanisms of East Asia cooperation, and carry out security cooperation incrementally to achieve similar or same goals. Promote the establishment of a multilateral dialogue platform in the Gulf region and give play to the role of coordinating and cooperative mechanisms such as the Meeting of Foreign Ministers of the Neighboring Countries of Afghanistan and the China-Horn of Africa Peace, Governance and Development Conference to promote regional and global peace and stability.



（三）适时举办全球安全倡议高级别活动，加强安全领域政策沟通，促进政府间对话合作，进一步凝聚国际社会应对安全挑战合力。




3. Hold high-level conferences on the GSI in due course to strengthen policy communication in the field of security, promote intergovernmental dialogue and cooperation, and further foster synergy in the international community to address security challenges.



（四）支持中非和平安全论坛、中东安全论坛、北京香山论坛、全球公共安全合作论坛（连云港）以及其他国际性交流对话平台为深化安全领域交流合作继续作出积极贡献。鼓励创设全球性安全论坛，为各国政府、国际组织、智库、社会组织等发挥各自优势参与全球安全治理提供新平台。




4. Support the China-Africa Peace and Security Forum, the Middle East Security Forum, the Beijing Xiangshan Forum, the Global Public Security Cooperation Forum (Lianyungang) and other international dialogue platforms in contributing to deepening exchange and cooperation on security. Promote the establishment of more global security forums to provide new platforms for governments, international organizations, think tanks and social organizations to leverage their advantages and participate in global security governance. 



（五）围绕应对反恐、网络、生物、新兴科技等领域安全挑战，搭建更多国际交流合作平台和机制，共同提升非传统安全治理能力。鼓励各国高等军事院校、高等警察院校之间加强交流合作。未来5年中方愿向全球发展中国家提供5000个研修培训名额用于培养专业人才，共同应对全球性安全问题。




5. Build more international platforms and mechanisms for exchange and cooperation on addressing security challenges in such areas as counter-terrorism, cybersecurity, biosecurity and emerging technologies, with a view to improving the governance capacity in the domain of non-traditional security. Encourage more exchanges and cooperation among university-level military and police academies. China is willing to provide other developing countries with 5,000 training opportunities in the next five years to train professionals for addressing global security issues.



全球安全倡议秉持开放包容原则，欢迎和期待各方参与，共同丰富倡议内涵，积极探索开展新形式新领域合作。中方愿同世界上所有爱好和平、追求幸福的国家和人民携手同行，协力应对各种传统和非传统安全挑战，并肩守护地球家园的和平安宁，共同开创人类更加美好的未来，让和平的薪火代代相传、平安的钟声响彻人间。




The GSI, following the principle of openness and inclusiveness, welcomes and looks forward to the participation of all parties to jointly enrich its substance and actively explore new forms and areas of cooperation. China stands ready to work with all countries and peoples who love peace and aspire to happiness to address all kinds of traditional and non-traditional security challenges, protect the peace and tranquility of the earth, and jointly create a better future for mankind, so that the torch of peace will be passed on from generation to generation and shine across the world.


2018年4月9日，加拿大《环球邮报》发表驻加拿大大使卢沙野署名文章“美国挑起对华贸易摩擦，中国不会退缩”。全文如下：




On April 9, the Globe and Mail published an article of Ambassador Lu Shaye titled "China will not back down in a trade fight with the United States". The full text is as follows:




美国挑起对华贸易摩擦，中国不会退缩




China will not back down in a trade fight with the United States



继宣布对价值500亿美元中国出口商品加征关税的清单后，美国总统特朗普上周又放言要考虑再对中国1000亿美元出口商品加征关税。




Not satisfied with imposing US$50-billion in tariffs on Chinese exports to the United States, President Donald Trump last week said he was considering new tariffs on an additional US$100-billion of Chinese goods.



美方这一疯狂的举动是典型的单边主义和贸易保护主义，是对全球多边主义和自由贸易的宣战，不仅损害中国人民的利益，严重违反世贸组织规则，动摇多边贸易体制根基，冲击世界经济和全球贸易的正常发展，而且最终将损害美国自己的利益。




This loony unilateral behavior is typical of U.S. trade protectionism, which wages war against global multilateralism and free trade. It not only undermines the interests of the Chinese people, it seriously violates World Trade Organization (WTO) rules, will shake the foundations of the multilateral trading system, disrupt the world's economy and global trade, but will also backfire on the United States.



中方不会坐以待毙，我们已做好充分准备。请美国放心，一旦美方公布新增1000亿美元商品征税清单，我们将毫不犹豫、立即进行强力反击。




China has been prepared for these actions, and we can assure the United States that we will immediately, and without hesitation, fight back strongly, should the United States unveil a list of targets in an additional $100-billion in duties.



中方不想打贸易战，但不怕打贸易战。美方要打多久，我们就打多久，一直打到完全胜利。我们不排除任何选项，而且一定会说到做到。中方一贯主张也愿意通过对话协商解决纠纷，但对话协商应遵循国际法和国际贸易规则，而不是美国的国内法；要做到相互尊重、平等相待，而不是居高临下、单方胁迫；要体现互谅互让、有取有予的原则，而不是漫天要价、胡搅蛮缠。




China will not wage a trade war, but it is also not afraid of a trade war imposed by others. If the United States wants a fight, we are prepared to stay with it until achieving a complete victory. All options will be on the table and we will not back down.



Our preference is to settle economic differences through dialogue and negotiations based on international law and trade rules, not based on domestic law and politics in the United States.



Parties who engage in dialogue and negotiation should treat each other with respect and equality, and demonstrate a mutual understanding and willingness to compromise. Instead, one party has issued condescending threats and unreasonable demands on the other.



在此，我想澄清几个观点。首先，谁是中美贸易冲突的始作俑者？很明显，是美国。美不仅是多边贸易体制和世贸规则的破坏者，也是给全球经济发展增添不稳定因素的煽风点火者。中国是直接受害者。中国在对美方采取反制措施的同时，将美诉诸WTO争端解决机制。中国的反应和举措恰恰是为了维护本国合法权益，捍卫多边贸易体制和世贸组织规则，合情合理合法，符合包括加拿大在内的各国和各国人民利益。




I would like to clear the air on several points.



First, who is the initiator of the current China-U.S. trade conflict? Obviously, it's the United States. The United States is not only a saboteur of the multilateral trade mechanism and WTO rules, but it wants to aim a flamethrower at global economic development. China is a direct victim of this U.S. behaviour. By referring the United States to the WTO's dispute settlement mechanisms and taking countermeasures, China is legitimately defending its rights and interests while safeguarding the multilateral trading system and WTO rules. China's behaviour, which is in line with the interests of all trading countries, including Canada, is legitimate, reasonable and lawful.



第二，美方在中美贸易中吃亏了吗？一些美国人认为他们吃亏了。但中美贸易出现不平衡，首先是美经济结构问题，美储蓄小于投资，这是美全球贸易逆差的重要原因。第二是美元。美必须保持比较大的贸易逆差，才能维持美元国际支付货币的地位。第三是美对华出口管制，中国想进口的东西美国不卖。此外，美方故意夸大中美贸易逆差。加拿大对美方在加美贸易中的类似伎俩一定不陌生。




Second, does the United States suffer losses in bilateral trade with China? Many in America say yes, but there are several reasons for China-U.S. trade imbalance. The first is the economic structure of the United States: The country saves less than it invests, and this is an important factor in its trade deficit. The second is the U.S. dollar, whose strength as the international currency of settlements is underpinned by a relatively large trade deficit. The third is U.S. export controls against China: What China wants to import is prohibited by the U.S. government to export. It doesn't help that the United States continually emphasizes and exaggerates its trade deficit with China. Canada is probably very familiar with the similar tricks the United States uses when it portrays its bilateral arrangements with Canada.



第三，中国没有任何法律规定外国企业必须转让它的技术给中国合作伙伴。企业之间进行技术转让，完全依据契约，是市场主体自愿交易的结果。实际上，很多美国企业通过在中国设立合资企业和出售专利的方式实现了巨大收益，获取的利润甚至超过它们在美国本土的利润。




Third, there's no law in China that forces foreign companies to transfer technologies to their Chinese commercial partners. In China, any transfer of technology among the enterprises is in accordance with contracts and agreements based on voluntary deals by the market entities. In fact, many U.S. companies have benefited through joint ventures and patent sales in China. In many cases, profits earned in China by American companies surpassed those they earned in the United States.



第四，中国提出“中国制造2025”计划，目的是为中国制造业的升级提供战略指引和信息指导，加强自身的制造能力建设，是无可非议的，也符合中国在世贸规则项下的义务。“中国制造2025”是透明、开放、非歧视的，中国企业、外国企业、国有企业、民营企业都可以参加。实际上美国、欧盟等很多国家都有类似的指导性规划。所以，“中国制造2025”绝不是美国对华发起301调查的正当理由。




Fourth, the Made in China 2025 program proposed by the Chinese government aims to provide strategic guidance and information for the upgrading of the Chinese manufacturing sector in an effort to strengthen China's manufacturing capacity. It is beyond reproach, and meets China's obligations under WTO rules. Made in China 2025 is transparent, open and non-discriminatory. Both Chinese and foreign enterprises, state-owned and private ones, can all take part in it. In fact, many countries - including the United States and many in the European Union - have similar guidance targets and plans. So, this is by no means a legitimate excuse for the United States to start the Section 301 investigation against China.



中加两国都是自由贸易的坚定维护者，都支持通过多边贸易机制协商解决贸易争端。中方愿与加方共同努力，遏制贸易保护主义势头，维护国际多边贸易体制和自由贸易。




Both China and Canada are strong defenders of free trade, and both countries support the resolution of trade disputes through consultation within the framework of the multilateral trading system. China is willing to work together with Canada to curb the momentum of protectionism and safeguard the international multilateral trading system and free trade.

5月15日，“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛在北京雁栖湖国际会议中心举行圆桌峰会，国家主席习近平主持会议并致辞。[新华社 马占成 摄]
Chinese President Xi Jinping chairs the Leaders' Roundtable Summit at the Belt and Road Forum (BRF) for International Cooperation at Yanqi Lake International Convention Center in Beijing, capital of China, May 15, 2017. (Xinhua/Ma Zhancheng)
1、我们，中华人民共和国主席习近平、阿根廷总统马克里、白俄罗斯总统卢卡申科、智利总统巴切莱特、捷克总统泽曼、印度尼西亚总统佐科、哈萨克斯坦总统纳扎尔巴耶夫、肯尼亚总统肯雅塔、吉尔吉斯斯坦总统阿坦巴耶夫、老挝国家主席本扬、菲律宾总统杜特尔特、俄罗斯总统普京、瑞士联邦主席洛伊特哈德、土耳其总统埃尔多安、乌兹别克斯坦总统米尔济约耶夫、越南国家主席陈大光、柬埔寨首相洪森、埃塞俄比亚总理海尔马里亚姆、斐济总理姆拜尼马拉马、希腊总理齐普拉斯、匈牙利总理欧尔班、意大利总理真蒂洛尼、马来西亚总理纳吉布、蒙古国总理额尔登巴特、缅甸国务资政昂山素季、巴基斯坦总理谢里夫、波兰总理希德沃、塞尔维亚总理、当选总统武契奇、西班牙首相拉霍伊、斯里兰卡总理维克勒马辛哈于2017年5月15日出席在北京举行的“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛圆桌峰会。我们也欢迎联合国秘书长古特雷斯、世界银行行长金墉、国际货币基金组织总裁拉加德出席。会议由中华人民共和国主席习近平主持。	1. We, President Xi Jinping of the People's Republic of China, President Mauricio Macri of the Republic of Argentina, President Alexander Lukashenko of the Republic of Belarus, President Michelle Bachelet Jeria of the Republic of Chile, President Milos Zeman of the Czech Republic, President Joko Widodo of the Republic of Indonesia, President Nursultan Nazarbayev of the Republic of Kazakhstan, President Uhuru Kenyatta of the Republic of Kenya, President Almazbek Atambayev of the Kyrgyz Republic, President Bounnhang Vorachith of the Lao People's Democratic Republic, President Rodrigo Roa Duterte of the Republic of the Philippines, President Vladimir Putin of the Russian Federation, President Doris Leuthard of the Swiss Confederation, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of the Republic of Turkey, President Shavkat Mirziyoyev of the Republic of Uzbekistan, President Tran Dai Quang of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, Prime Minister Hun Sen of the Kingdom of Cambodia, Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Prime Minister Josaia Voreqe Bainimarama of the Republic of Fiji, Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras of the Hellenic Republic, Prime Minister Viktor Orban of Hungary, Prime Minister Paolo Gentiloni of the Italian Republic, Prime Minister Najib Razak of Malaysia, Prime Minister Jargaltulgyn Erdenebat of Mongolia, State Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar, Prime Minister Muhammad Nawaz Sharif of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Prime Minister Beata Szydlo of the Republic of Poland, Prime Minister and President-elect Aleksandar Vucic of the Republic of Serbia, President of the Government Mariano Rajoy Brey of the Kingdom of Spain, and Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, attended the Leaders Roundtable of the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation on 15 May 2017 in Beijing. We also welcome the participation of Secretary General Antonio Guterres of the United Nations, President Jim Yong Kim of the World Bank Group, Managing Director Christine Lagarde of the International Monetary Fund. The Leaders Roundtable was chaired by President Xi Jinping of the People's Republic of China.
时代背景	General Context
2、当前，世界经济深度调整，机遇与挑战并存。这是一个充满机遇的时代，各国都在追求和平、发展与合作。联合国2030年可持续发展议程为国际发展合作描绘了新蓝图。	2. We are mindful that the world economy is undergoing profound changes, presenting both opportunities and challenges. This is an era of opportunity, where countries continue to aspire for peace, development and cooperation. The UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development with the set of Sustainable Development Goals at its core provides a new blueprint of international cooperation.
3、在此背景下，我们欢迎各国积极开展双边、三方、区域和多边合作，消除贫困，创造就业，应对国际金融危机影响，促进可持续发展，推进市场化产业转型，实现经济多元化发展。我们高兴地注意到，各国发展战略和互联互通合作倡议层出不穷，为加强国际合作提供了广阔空间。	3. In this context, we welcome bilateral, triangular, regional and multilateral cooperation where countries place emphasis on eradicating poverty, creating jobs, addressing the consequences of international financial crises, promoting sustainable development, and advancing market-based industrial transformation and economic diversification. We note with appreciation that various development strategies and connectivity cooperation initiatives have been put forward, providing broad space for strengthening international cooperation.
4、我们进一步认识到，世界经济面临诸多挑战，虽在缓慢复苏，但下行风险犹存。全球贸易和投资增长依然低迷，以规则为基础的多边贸易体制有待加强。各国特别是发展中国家仍然面临消除贫困、促进包容持续经济增长、实现可持续发展等共同挑战。	4. We further recognize the challenges that the world economy faces. While it is currently experiencing modest recovery, downside risks remain. The growth of global trade and investment remains tempered, and the rules-based multilateral trading regime is yet to be strengthened. All countries, especially developing ones, still face common challenges of eradicating poverty, promoting inclusive and sustained economic growth, and achieving sustainable development.
5、我们注意到，“丝绸之路经济带”和“21世纪海上丝绸之路”（“一带一路”倡议）能够在挑战和变革中创造机遇，我们欢迎并支持“一带一路”倡议。该倡议加强亚欧互联互通，同时对非洲、拉美等其他地区开放。“一带一路”作为一项重要的国际倡议，为各国深化合作提供了重要机遇，取得了积极成果，未来将为各方带来更多福祉。	5. Noting that the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road (The Belt and Road Initiative) can create opportunities amidst challenges and changes, we welcome and support the Belt and Road Initiative to enhance connectivity between Asia and Europe, which is also open to other regions such as Africa and South America. By providing important opportunities for countries to deepen cooperation, it has achieved positive outcomes and has future potential to deliver more benefits as an important international initiative.
6、我们强调，国际、地区和国别合作框架和倡议之间沟通协调能够为推进互联互通和可持续发展带来合作机遇。这些框架和倡议包括：2030年可持续发展议程、亚的斯亚贝巴行动议程、非洲2063年议程、文明古国论坛、亚太经合组织互联互通蓝图、东盟共同体愿景2025、亚欧会议及其互联互通工作组、商旅驿站关税倡议、中国和中东欧国家合作、中欧海陆快线、中间走廊倡议、中国－欧盟互联互通平台、欧盟东部伙伴关系、以平等、开放、透明为原则的欧亚伙伴关系、南美洲区域基础设施一体化倡议、东盟互联互通总体规划2025、欧亚经济联盟2030年经济发展基本方向、气候变化巴黎协定、跨欧洲交通运输网、西巴尔干六国互联互通议程、世界贸易组织贸易便利化协议等。	6. We also emphasize the opportunities which can be created by communication and coordination among other global, regional and national frameworks and initiatives for promoting cooperation in connectivity and sustainable development, such as 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Addis Ababa Action Agenda, Agenda 2063 of the African Union, Ancient Civilizations Forum, APEC Connectivity Blueprint, ASEAN Community Vision 2025, Asia-Europe Meeting and its group on path-finder of connectivity, Caravanserai Customs Initiative, China and Central and Eastern European Countries Cooperation, China-Europe Land-Sea Express Route, East-West Middle Corridor Initiative, EU-China Connectivity Platform, EU Eastern Partnership, Eurasian partnership based on the principles of equality, openness and transparency, Initiative for the Integration of Regional Infrastructure in South America, Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity 2025, Main Directions for Economic Development of the Eurasian Economic Union until 2030, Paris Agreement on Climate Change, Trans-European Transport Networks, Western Balkans 6 Connectivity Agenda, WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement.
7、我们重申，在“一带一路”倡议等框架下，共同致力于建设开放型经济、确保自由包容性贸易、反对一切形式的保护主义。我们将努力促进以世界贸易组织为核心、普遍、以规则为基础、开放、非歧视、公平的多边贸易体制。	7. We reaffirm our shared commitment to build open economy, ensure free and inclusive trade, oppose all forms of protectionism including in the framework of the Belt and Road Initiative. We endeavor to promote a universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system with WTO at its core.
合作目标	Cooperation Objectives
8、我们主张加强“一带一路”倡议和各种发展战略的国际合作，建立更紧密合作伙伴关系，推动南北合作、南南合作和三方合作。	8. We stand for enhancing international cooperation including the Belt and Road Initiative and various development strategies, by building closer collaboration partnerships, which include advancing North-South, South-South, and triangular cooperation.
9、我们重申，在公平竞争和尊重市场规律与国际准则基础上，大力促进经济增长、扩大贸易和投资。我们欢迎推进产业合作、科技创新和区域经济一体化，推动中小微企业深入融入全球价值链。同时发挥税收和财政政策作用，将增长和生产性投资作为优先方向。	9. We reiterate the importance of expanding economic growth, trade and investment based on level-playing field, on market rules and on universally recognized international norms. We welcome the promotion of industrial cooperation, scientific and technological innovation, and regional economic cooperation and integration so as to increase, inter alia, the integration and participation of micro, small and medium enterprises in global value chains. Attention should be paid to tax and fiscal policies, prioritizing growth and productive investment.
10、我们主张加强各国基础设施联通、规制衔接和人员往来。需要特别关注最不发达国家、内陆发展中国家、小岛屿发展中国家和中等收入国家，突破发展瓶颈，实现有效互联互通。	10. We stand for strengthening physical, institutional and people-to-people connectivity among all countries. The least developed countries, landlocked developing countries, small island developing states and middle-income countries deserve special attention to remove bottlenecks of development and achieve effective connectivity.
11、我们致力于扩大人文交流，维护和平正义，加强社会凝聚力和包容性，促进民主、良政、法治、人权，推动性别平等和妇女赋权；共同打击一切形式的腐败和贿赂；更好应对儿童、残疾人、老年人等弱势群体诉求；完善全球经济治理，确保所有人公平享有发展机遇和成果。	11. We endeavor to expand people-to-people exchanges, promote peace, justice, social cohesion, inclusiveness, democracy, good governance, the rule of law, human rights, gender equality and women empowerment; work together to fight against corruption and bribery in all their forms; to be more responsive to all the needs of those in vulnerable situations such as, children, persons with disabilities and older persons; and help improve global economic governance, and ensure equal access by all to development opportunities and benefits.
12、我们决心阻止地球的退化，包括在气候变化问题上立即采取行动，鼓励《巴黎协定》所有批约方全面落实协定；以平等、可持续的方式管理自然资源，保护并可持续利用海洋、淡水、森林、山地、旱地；保护生物多样性、生态系统和野生生物，防治荒漠化和土地退化等，实现经济、社会、环境三大领域综合、平衡、可持续发展。	12. We are determined to protect the planet from degradation, including through taking urgent action on climate change and encouraging all parties which have ratified it to fully implement the Paris Agreement, managing the natural resources in an equitable and sustainable manner, conserving and sustainably using oceans and seas, freshwater resources, as well as forests, mountains and drylands, protecting biodiversity, ecosystems and wildlife, combating desertification and land degradation so as to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions in a balanced and integrated manner.
13、我们鼓励政府、国际和地区组织、私营部门、民间社会和广大民众共同参与，建立巩固友好关系，增进相互理解与信任。	13. We encourage the involvement of governments, international and regional organizations, the private sector, civil society and citizens in fostering and promoting friendship, mutual understanding and trust.
合作原则	Cooperation Principles
14、我们将秉持和平合作、开放包容、互学互鉴、互利共赢、平等透明、相互尊重的精神，在共商、共建、共享的基础上，本着法治、机会均等原则加强合作。为此，我们根据各自国内法律和政策，强调以下合作原则：	14. We uphold the spirit of peace, cooperation, openness, transparency, inclusiveness, equality, mutual learning, mutual benefit and mutual respect by strengthening cooperation on the basis of extensive consultation and the rule of law, joint efforts, shared benefits and equal opportunities for all. In this context we highlight the following principles guiding our cooperation, in accordance with our respective national laws and policies:
（1）平等协商。恪守《联合国宪章》宗旨和原则，尊重各国主权和领土完整等国际法基本准则；协商制定合作规划，推进合作项目。	a) Consultation on an equal footing: Honoring the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and international law including respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of countries; formulating cooperation plans and advancing cooperation projects through consultation.
（2）互利共赢。寻求利益契合点和合作最大公约数，兼顾各方立场。	b) Mutual benefit: Seeking convergence of interests and the broadest common ground for cooperation, taking into account the perspectives of different stakeholders.
（3）和谐包容。尊重自然和文化的多样性，相信所有文化和文明都能够为可持续发展作贡献。	c) Harmony and inclusiveness: Acknowledging the natural and cultural diversity of the world and recognizing that all cultures and civilizations can contribute to sustainable development.
（4）市场运作。充分认识市场作用和企业主体地位，确保政府发挥适当作用，政府采购程序应开放、透明、非歧视。	d) Market-based operation: Recognizing the role of the market and that of business as key players, while ensuring that the government performs its proper role and highlighting the importance of open, transparent, and non-discriminatory procurement procedures.
（5）平衡和可持续。强调项目的经济、社会、财政、金融和环境可持续性，促进环境高标准，同时统筹好经济增长、社会进步和环境保护之间的关系。	e) Balance and sustainability: Emphasizing the importance of economic, social, fiscal, financial and environmental sustainability of projects, and of promoting high environmental standards, while striking a good balance among economic growth, social progress and environmental protection.
合作举措	Cooperation Measures
15、我们重申需要重点推动政策沟通、设施联通、贸易畅通、资金融通、民心相通，强调根据各国法律法规和相关国际义务，采取以下切实行动：	15. We affirm the need to prioritize policy consultation, trade promotion, infrastructure connectivity, financial cooperation and people-to-people exchanges, and we highlight concrete actions, in accordance with our national laws and regulations and international obligations where applicable, such as:
（1）加强对话协商，促进各国发展战略对接，注意到“一带一路”倡议与第六段所列发展计划和倡议协调发展，促进欧洲、亚洲、南美洲、非洲等地区之间伙伴关系的努力。	a) Pursuing dialogue and consultation in order to build synergies in development strategies among participating countries, noting the efforts to strengthen cooperation in coordinating development of the Belt and Road Initiative with other plans and initiatives as mentioned in Paragraph 6 and to promote partnerships among Europe, Asia, South America, Africa and other regions.
（2）就宏观经济问题进行深入磋商，完善现有多双边合作对话机制，为务实合作和大型项目提供有力政策支持。	b) Conducting in-depth consultation on macroeconomic issues by optimizing the existing multilateral and bilateral cooperation and dialogue mechanisms, so as to provide robust policy support for practical cooperation and the implementation of major projects.
（3）加强创新合作，支持电子商务、数字经济、智慧城市、科技园区等领域的创新行动计划，鼓励在尊重知识产权的同时，加强互联网时代创新创业模式交流。	c) Strengthening cooperation on innovation, by supporting innovation action plans for e-commerce, digital economy, smart cities and science and technology parks, and by encouraging greater exchanges on innovation and business startup models in the Internet age in respect of intellectual property rights.
（4）推动在公路、铁路、港口、海上和内河运输、航空、能源管道、电力、海底电缆、光纤、电信、信息通信技术等领域务实合作，欢迎新亚欧大陆桥、北方海航道、中间走廊等多模式综合走廊和国际骨干通道建设，逐步构建国际性基础设施网络。	d) Promoting practical cooperation on roads, railways, ports, maritime and inland water transport, aviation, energy pipelines, electricity, fiber optic including trans-oceanic cable, telecommunications and information and communication technology, and welcoming the development of interconnected multimodal corridors, such us a new Eurasian Land Bridge, Northern Sea Route, the East-West Middle Corridor etc., and major trunk lines to put in place an international infrastructure network over time.
（5）通过借鉴相关国际标准、必要时统一规则体制和技术标准等手段，实现基础设施规划和建设协同效应最大化；为私人资本投资基础设施建设培育有利、可预测的环境；在有利于增加就业、提高效率的领域促进公私伙伴关系；欢迎国际金融机构加强对基础设施建设的支持和投入。	e) Maximizing synergies in infrastructure planning and development by taking into account international standards where applicable, and by aiming at harmonizing rules and technological standards when necessary; fostering a favorable environment and predictability for infrastructure investment by private capital; promoting public-private partnership in areas that create more jobs and generate greater efficiency; welcoming international financial institutions to increase support and investment for infrastructure development.
（6）深化经贸合作，维护多边贸易体制的权威和效力；共同推动世界贸易组织第11次部长级会议取得积极成果；推动贸易投资自由化和便利化；让普通民众从贸易中获益。	f) Deepening economic and trade cooperation; upholding the authority and effectiveness of the multilateral trading system, and working together to achieve positive outcomes at the 11th WTO ministerial conference; promoting trade and investment liberalization and facilitation; enabling the general public to benefit from trade.
（7）通过培育新的贸易增长点、促进贸易平衡、推动电子商务和数字经济等方式扩大贸易，欢迎有兴趣的国家开展自贸区建设并商签自贸协定。	g) Expanding trade by nurturing new areas of trade growth, promoting trade balance and promoting e-commerce and digital economy, welcoming the development of free trade areas and signing of free trade agreements by interested countries.
（8）推动全球价值链发展和供应链联接，同时确保安全生产，加强社会保障体系；增加双向投资，加强新兴产业、贸易、工业园区、跨境经济园区等领域合作。	h) Advancing global value chains development and supply chain connectivity, while ensuring safer work places and strengthening social protection systems; increasing two-way investment, and enhancing cooperation in emerging industries, trade and industrial parks and cross-border economic zones.
（9）加强环境、生物多样性、自然资源保护、应对气候变化、抗灾、减灾、提高灾害风险管理能力、促进可再生能源和能效等领域合作。	i) Enhancing cooperation in ensuring the protection of the environment, of bio-diversity and of natural resources, in addressing the adverse impacts of climate change, in promoting resilience and disaster-risk reduction and management, and in advancing renewable energy and energy efficiency.
（10）加强通关手续等方面信息交流，推动监管互认、执法互助、信息共享；加强海关合作，通过统一手续、降低成本等方式促进贸易便利化，同时促进保护知识产权合作。	j) Regarding the process of customs clearance, strengthening cooperation on information exchange and on developing mutual recognition of control, mutual assistance of enforcement, and mutual sharing of information; enhancing customs cooperation with a view to facilitating trade including by harmonizing procedures and reducing costs, and in this regard, strengthening cooperation in protecting intellectual property rights.
（11）合作构建长期、稳定、可持续的融资体系；加强金融设施互联互通，创新投融资模式和平台，提高金融服务水平；探寻更好服务本地金融市场的机会；鼓励开发性金融机构发挥积极作用，加强与多边开发机构的合作。	k) Jointly working on a long-term, stable and sustainable financing system; enhancing financial infrastructure connectivity, by exploring new models and platforms of investment and financing and improving financial services; assessing the opportunity to better serve local financial market; and encouraging development-oriented financial institutions to play an active role and strengthen cooperation with multilateral development institutions.
（12）为构建稳定、公平的国际金融体系作贡献；通过推动支付体系合作和普惠金融等途径，促进金融市场相互开放和互联互通；鼓励金融机构在有关国家和地区设立分支机构；推动签署双边本币结算和合作协议，发展本币债券和股票市场；鼓励通过对话加强金融合作，规避金融风险。	l) Contributing to a stable and equitable international financial system; promoting openness and connectivity among financial markets, including through mutual cooperation on payment systems and the promotion of financial inclusion; encouraging financial institutions to establish commercial presence in relevant countries and regions; promoting bilateral local currency settlement and cooperation agreements, and facilitating the development of local currency bonds and stock markets; encouraging dialogues to enhance financial cooperation and fend off financial risks.
（13）加强人文交流和民间纽带，深化教育、科技、体育、卫生、智库、媒体以及包括实习培训在内的能力建设等领域务实合作。	m) Promoting people-to-people exchanges and bonds by deepening practical cooperation on education, science, technology, sport, health, think-tank, media, capacity building including through internships.
（14）鼓励不同文明间对话和文化交流，促进旅游业发展，保护世界文化和自然遗产。	n) Encouraging dialogues among civilizations, cultural exchanges, promoting tourism and protecting the world's cultural and natural heritage.
愿景展望	Our Vision for the Future
16、我们携手推进“一带一路”建设和加强互联互通倡议对接的努力，为国际合作提供了新机遇、注入了新动力，有助于推动实现开放、包容和普惠的全球化。	16. Our joint endeavor on the Belt and Road Initiative and seeking complementarities with other connectivity initiatives provide new opportunities and impetus for international cooperation. It helps to work for a globalization that is open, inclusive and beneficial to all.
17、我们重申，促进和平、推动互利合作、尊重《联合国宪章》宗旨原则和国际法，这是我们的共同责任；实现包容和可持续增长与发展、提高人民生活水平，这是我们的共同目标；构建繁荣、和平的人类命运共同体，这是我们的共同愿望。	17. We reiterate that promoting peace, mutually-beneficial cooperation,and honoring the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and international law are our shared responsibilities; achieving inclusive and sustainable growth and development, and improving people's quality of life are our common goals; creating a prosperous and peaceful community with shared future for mankind is our common aspiration.
18、我们祝贺中国成功举办“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛。	18. We congratulate China on successfully hosting the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation.



现在，我受全国人大常委会委托，向大会报告工作，请予审议。	On behalf of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPC), I will now present to you the report on the work of the Standing Committee for your deliberation.
过去一年的主要工作	Major Initiatives of the Past Year
过去一年，在以习近平同志为核心的党中央坚强领导下，全国人大常委会全面贯彻党的十八大和十八届三中、四中、五中、六中全会精神，以邓小平理论、“三个代表”重要思想、科学发展观为指导，深入学习贯彻习近平总书记系列重要讲话精神和治国理政新理念新思想新战略，坚持党的领导、人民当家作主、依法治国有机统一，紧紧围绕统筹推进“五位一体”总体布局和协调推进“四个全面”战略布局、贯彻落实新发展理念，认真行使宪法法律赋予的职权，努力发挥最高国家权力机关作用。	
Over the past year, under the firm leadership of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core, the NPC Standing Committee has comprehensively implemented the guidelines from the 18th National Party Congress and those of the third through sixth plenary sessions of the 18th Party Central Committee; followed the guidance of Deng Xiaoping Theory, the Theory of Three Represents, and the Scientific Outlook on Development; and carefully studied and put into practice the principles from General Secretary Xi Jinping's major addresses and his new vision, thinking, and strategies for the governance of China. We have upheld our commitment to integrating leadership by the Party, the position of the people as masters of the country, and law-based governance, and have exercised the functions and powers granted to us by the Constitution and other laws and worked hard in our role as the country's highest organ of state power, focusing closely on the overall plan for balanced economic, political, cultural, social, and ecological progress, on the coordinated advancement of the Four-Pronged Comprehensive Strategy,(1) and on the implementation of the new development philosophy.

Note: (1) This refers to making comprehensive moves to finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects, deepen reform, advance the law-based governance of China, and strengthen Party self-governance.

坚持中国共产党的领导，是党和国家的根本所在、命脉所在，是全国各族人民的利益所在、幸福所在。党的十八届六中全会正式确立习近平总书记为党中央的核心、全党的核心，反映了全党全军全国各族人民的共同心愿。全国人大常委会牢固树立政治意识、大局意识、核心意识、看齐意识，自觉在思想上政治上行动上同以习近平同志为核心的党中央保持高度一致，坚持党中央集中统一领导，坚决维护党中央权威，保证党的路线方针政策和党中央决策部署在人大工作中得到贯彻和执行。	Upholding leadership by the Party is the foundation and lifeblood of both the Party and the country and affects the interests and wellbeing of all the people of China. At its Sixth Plenary Session, the 18th Party Central Committee formally affirmed that General Secretary Xi Jinping is at the core of the Central Committee and of the entire Party, reflecting the will of all members of the Party, all members of the armed forces, and all the people of China. We have built a keen awareness of the need to maintain political integrity, think in big-picture terms, uphold the leadership core, and keep in alignment; closely followed the Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core in terms of thinking, political stand, and action; upheld the centralized, unified leadership of the Central Committee and resolutely safeguarded its authority; and worked to see that the line, principles, and policies of the Party as well as the decisions and plans of the Party Central Committee are carried out in the NPC's work.
十二届全国人大四次会议以来，常委会制定8部法律，修改27部法律，通过7个有关法律问题的决定决议，作出1个法律解释，决定将1件法律草案、3件有关法律问题的决定草案提请全国人民代表大会审议，立法工作继续呈现数量多、分量重、节奏快的特点，立法质量进一步提高；检查6部法律的实施情况，听取审议国务院、最高人民法院、最高人民检察院20个工作报告，通过2个决议，开展3次专题询问和5项专题调研，监督工作在实践中不断完善，针对性和实效性进一步增强；审议通过专门委员会关于代表议案审议结果的报告8个、代表资格审查委员会关于个别代表的代表资格的报告7个，决定批准我国与外国缔结的条约、协定以及加入的国际公约7件，决定和批准任免一批国家机关工作人员，人大各项工作在以往基础上又取得新进展新成效。	
Since the Fourth Session of the 12th NPC, the Standing Committee has enacted 8 laws, revised 27 laws, passed 7 decisions or resolutions on legal issues, issued 1 legal interpretation, and resolved to present the draft of 1 law and 3 draft decisions on legal issues to this session of the NPC for deliberation. Our legislative work has continued to be characterized by the great number, importance, and pace of activities, and we have further improved the quality of the NPC's legislative work.

We inspected compliance with 6 laws; heard and deliberated 20 work reports from the State Council, the Supreme People's Court, and the Supreme People's Procuratorate; passed 2 resolutions; and conducted 3 special inquiries and 5 research projects. Through these activities, we have achieved continuous progress in the NPC's oversight work, making it more targeted and effective.

We deliberated and approved 8 reports from the NPC's special committees regarding their examination of deputies' proposals, as well as 7 reports from the Credentials Committee pertaining to its review of certain deputies' qualifications. We ratified 3 treaties and agreements concluded between China and foreign countries as well as China's accession to 4 international conventions, and made decisions on or gave approval to the appointment or removal of a number of officials of state bodies. New advances and achievements have been made in every area of the NPC's work.

一、着力推进重点领域立法、提高立法质量	1. We worked hard to advance legislation in key areas and improve the quality of legislation.
立法是全面依法治国的前提和基础。常委会坚持立法先行，紧紧抓住事关改革发展稳定的重大立法项目，紧紧抓住提高立法质量这个关键，一批重要法律相继出台。	Effective legislation is a prerequisite and foundation for China's law-based governance. Continuing to make legislation our top priority, we focused on major legislative items important to China's reform, development, and stability, gave great attention to the key task of raising the quality of our legislation, and enacted a number of important laws.
（一）构建国家安全法律制度体系取得重要进展。国家安全是安邦定国的基石。常委会贯彻落实总体国家安全观，坚持从国情和实际出发，保持政治定力，把握立法时机，加快国家安全法治建设。继2014年、2015年出台反间谍法、国家安全法、反恐怖主义法之后，2016年又审议通过境外非政府组织境内活动管理法、网络安全法、国防交通法，审议了国家情报法、核安全法草案等。	
1) Major progress was made in developing the system of national security laws.

National security is the foundation of a stable country. Putting into effect the integrative national security concept and giving central consideration to China's conditions and realities, we maintained our political resolve, acted when the time was right for legislation, and worked faster to develop the system of laws related to national security. Following the enactment of the Counter-Espionage Law in 2014 and the National Security Law and the Anti-Terrorism Law in 2015, last year we deliberated and passed the Law on Administration of Activities of Overseas Nongovernmental Organizations in the Mainland of China, the Cybersecurity Law, and the Law on National Defense Transportation, and deliberated the drafts of an intelligence law and a nuclear safety law.

境外非政府组织境内活动管理法将境外非政府组织在中国境内的活动和管理纳入法治轨道，既有利于保护其合法权益，促进正常交流与合作，也有利于依法加强监管，维护国家安全和社会公共利益。网络安全法是网络安全领域的基础性法律。这部法律正确处理网络空间自由和秩序、安全和发展、自主和开放的关系，遵循积极利用、科学发展、依法管理、确保安全的方针，确立了网络安全的各方面基本管理制度。国防交通法是本届全国人大常委会审议通过的第一部国防军事方面的法律，立法目的是促进交通领域军民深度融合发展，提高国防交通平时服务、急时应急、战时应战的能力，更好地服务国家安全和发展战略全局。	
The Law on Administration of Activities of Overseas Nongovernmental Organizations in the Mainland of China brings the administration of activities of overseas NGOs in the mainland of China into line with the rule of law. It will help to protect their legitimate rights and interests and promote exchange and cooperation, while also helping to strengthen China's law-based oversight and regulation and safeguard China's national security and public interests.

The Cybersecurity Law is a fundamental law in the field of cyber security. The law establishes basic regulatory systems for all areas of cyber security that ensure the effective utilization, sound development, law-based regulation, and improved security of cyberspace and establish the right balance between freedom and order, security and development, and national governance and international cooperation.

The Law on National Defense Transportation is the first piece of legislation pertaining to national defense deliberated and adopted by this Standing Committee. The purpose of this law is to facilitate closer military-civilian integration in the field of transportation and improve the capabilities of national defense transportation to serve in times of peace, respond to emergencies, and meet challenges in times of war, thus better serving the country's overall strategy for national security and development.

（二）扎实推进民法总则制定工作。编纂民法典是党的十八届四中全会提出的重要立法任务，是推进全面依法治国、完善中国特色社会主义法律体系的重大举措。新中国成立后，我国曾于1954年、1962年、1979年、2001年先后4次启动民法制定工作，前两次由于各种原因而未能取得实际成果；后两次经认真研究，决定按照“成熟一个通过一个”的工作思路，先分别制定民事单行法律，条件成熟时再编纂民法典。适应改革开放和发展社会主义市场经济的需要，我国制定了民法通则，并先后出台继承法、收养法、担保法、合同法、物权法、侵权责任法等一系列民事单行法律。现在，编纂民法典的条件已经具备。常委会研究提出民法典编纂“两步走”的工作思路：第一步，编纂民法典总则编，也就是制定民法总则；第二步，在民法总则出台后，进行民法典各分编的编纂工作，争取2020年形成统一的民法典。	
2) Steady progress was made in developing the General Provisions of Civil Law.

The development of a civil code was an important legislative task proposed at the Fourth Plenary Session of the 18th Party Central Committee, and is a move of enormous importance for fully advancing China's law-based governance and improving the socialist system of laws with Chinese characteristics. After the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, the NPC worked on developing civil law in 1954, 1962, 1979, and 2001, but for a number of reasons efforts in 1954 and 1962 failed to produce real results. The work in 1979 and 2001, through careful consideration, led to the adoption of an incremental approach, whereby individual civil laws were to be formulated first and the civil code was to be developed later when the conditions were right to do so. To meet the needs of promoting reform and opening up and developing the socialist market economy, China formulated the General Principles of Civil Law, and introduced a series of civil laws such as the Inheritance Law, the Adoption Law, the Guarantee Law, the Contract Law, the Property Law, and the Tort Law. Now the conditions are all in place for compiling a civil code. The Standing Committee has decided to adopt a two-step approach to develop the civil code: first, developing the general part of the civil code, or the General Provisions of Civil Law; and second, following the enactment of the General Provisions of Civil Law, compiling the individual books of the civil code, striving to form a complete civil code by 2020.

民法总则规定民法的基本原则和一般规则，在民法典中起统率性、纲领性作用。常委会以高度的责任感和使命感，全力以赴做好民法总则制定工作，先后3次审议法律草案，并通过中国人大网3次向社会公开征求意见。经过认真审议和反复修改，决定提请本次会议审议。相信经过全体代表的共同努力，一定能够制定出一部经得起历史和人民检验、有中国特色的民法总则，为编纂民法典打下坚实基础。	The General Provisions of Civil Law lays out the basic principles and general rules of civil law, and is the leading part of the civil code. The Standing Committee has worked with a strong sense of responsibility and mission to do its utmost to formulate the General Provisions of Civil Law, carrying out three readings to deliberate the draft legislation, and making three open requests for public comments through the NPC's website (www.npc.gov.cn). After careful deliberation and repeated revisions, we have decided to submit the draft of the General Provisions of Civil Law to this session for deliberation. We believe that with the concerted efforts of all deputies, we will be able to make this a piece of legislation that stands the test of time and meets the expectations of the people, and that is characteristically Chinese, thus laying a solid foundation for the civil code.
（三）加强文化、社会、环境保护等方面立法。针对我国文化领域立法工作相对滞后的情况，常委会大力加强文化法律制度建设，2016年审议通过两部重要法律。公共文化服务保障法明确政府在公共文化服务工作中的职责，确立公共文化服务的基本原则和保障制度等。电影产业促进法规范电影创作、摄制、发行、放映等活动，加大对电影产业的支持和保障力度。这两部法律，对于保障人民基本文化权益，丰富人民群众精神文化生活，弘扬社会主义核心价值观，必将发挥重要作用。	
3) Legislation concerning cultural, social, environmental, and other issues was strengthened.

Seeing that China's legislative work in the cultural sector was lagging behind, last year we strengthened the system of laws on culture by deliberating and passing two important laws related to this sector. The Law on Guaranteeing Public Cultural Services clarifies the duties and responsibilities of the government in the provision of public cultural services, and establishes basic principles and mechanisms for guaranteeing provision. The Film Industry Promotion Law regulates the scripting, filming, release, and showing of films and provides greater support and security for the film industry. These two laws will play a significant role in safeguarding the people's basic cultural rights and interests, enriching their intellectual and cultural life, and promoting core socialist values.

中医药是中华民族的瑰宝。常委会审议通过的中医药法明确规定，中医药是包括汉族和少数民族医药在内的我国各民族医药的统称，国家大力发展中医药事业，实行中西医并重的方针，建立符合中医药特点的管理制度，充分发挥中医药在我国医药卫生事业中的作用。	Traditional Chinese medicine is a national treasure. The Law on Traditional Chinese Medicine passed after deliberation by the Standing Committee clearly stipulates: traditional Chinese medicine is the general designation for the traditional medicine of the Han and of ethnic minorities of China. The state shall work hard to develop traditional Chinese medicine, follow the principle of attaching equal importance to traditional Chinese medicine and Western medicine, and put in place a regulatory system suitable to the unique features of traditional Chinese medicine, thereby giving full play to its role in China's health care services.
按照党中央关于“推动环境保护费改税”、“落实税收法定原则”的改革精神，常委会审议通过环境保护税法。这是本届全国人大常委会审议通过的第一部税收法律，对于充分发挥税收在控制和减少污染物排放、保护和改善生态环境方面的积极作用，具有重要意义。	In keeping with the decisions on reform made by the Party Central Committee related to replacing environmental protection fees with a tax and ensuring law-based taxation, we deliberated and passed the Environmental Protection Tax Law. This is the first tax law deliberated and approved by this Standing Committee; it is of great importance in giving full play to the role of taxation in helping to control and reduce emissions and protect and improve ecosystems and the environment.
常委会还制定了资产评估法，修改了民办教育促进法、野生动物保护法、海洋环境保护法、红十字会法、企业所得税法等。	We also enacted the Asset Appraisal Law and revised laws including the Law on the Promotion of Privately-Run Schools, the Wildlife Protection Law, the Marine Environment Protection Law, the Law on the Red Cross Society, and the Law on Corporate Income Tax.
（四）完善立法工作机制和方式方法。一是出台《关于建立健全全国人大专门委员会、常委会工作机构组织起草重要法律草案制度的实施意见》。常委会过去一年审议的法律案中，有10件是由有关专门委员会和常委会工作机构牵头起草的。二是健全法律草案征求代表意见制度，邀请代表参与立法调研、论证、审议、评估等工作，认真听取和采纳代表的意见建议，更好发挥代表在立法工作中的作用。三是制定《立法项目征集和论证工作规范》，推进立法工作规范化、制度化建设。四是完善基层立法联系点制度，先后就7部法律草案8次组织听取基层干部群众意见，立法工作更加接地气、察民情。我们还召开全国地方立法研讨会，加强对地方立法特别是设区的市立法工作的指导。全国新赋予地方立法权的273个市、自治州中，已有269个经批准开始制定地方性法规。	
4) Legislative mechanisms and methods were refined.

First, we published the guidelines on establishing sound systems under which special committees of the NPC and working bodies of the NPC Standing Committee organize the drafting of important laws. Of all the legislative items deliberated by the Standing Committee this past year, the drafting for 10 items was led by relevant special committees of the NPC and working bodies of the Standing Committee.

Second, we improved the mechanisms for soliciting the opinions of deputies on the drafts of laws and invited them to participate in the research, debate, deliberation, and assessment process so as to ensure their comments and suggestions can be effectively heard and adopted. These efforts have enabled deputies to play a bigger role in the NPC's legislative work.

Third, we formulated the Procedures for Collecting and Discussing Legislative Items, making progress in efforts to better standardize and institutionalize legislative work.

Fourth, we improved the system for staying connected with local communities on legislative matters, and on eight occasions organized activities to solicit comments on seven draft laws from the general public and officials at the community level. This ensured that legislative work was carried out in close connection with the people and was better able to reflect public sentiment.

We held a national symposium on local legislation to guide local legislative work, especially the legislative work of cities with subsidiary districts. Of the 273 cities and autonomous prefectures newly granted local legislative powers by the revised Legislation Law, 269 have, with approval from provincial-level people's congresses, already begun to formulate local regulations.

二、依法对若干重大问题作出决定	2. We worked in accordance with the law to issue decisions on a number of major issues.
人大工作是党和国家工作的重要组成部分。常委会坚持从政治上把握、在大局下行动，大事要事敢于担当、善于作为，确保党的主张通过法定程序成为国家意志。	The work of the NPC is an important part of the work of the Party and the country. We have upheld our commitment to the right political direction and to working with the big picture in mind. When faced with major issues and important matters, we demonstrated the courage to take on responsibility and the ability to fulfill duties, ensuring that the Party's propositions are turned into the will of the state through statutory procedures.
（一）及时妥善处理辽宁拉票贿选案的有关问题，坚决维护人民代表大会制度的权威和尊严。辽宁拉票贿选案是新中国成立以来查处的第一起发生在省级层面、严重违反党纪国法、严重破坏党内选举制度和人大选举制度的重大案件。按照有关法律规定，涉案的辽宁省人大代表的代表资格终止后，其中的省人大常委会组成人员的职务依法相应终止。辽宁省人大常委会因组成人员已不足半数，无法召开常委会会议履行职责。为及时妥善处理这一从未遇到过的特殊问题，全国人大常委会根据宪法精神和有关法律原则作出创制性安排。2016年9月13日，临时召开常委会第二十三次会议，审议通过了全国人大常委会代表资格审查委员会的报告，依法确定辽宁省45名拉票贿选的全国人大代表当选无效；审议通过了关于成立辽宁省第十二届人民代表大会第七次会议筹备组的决定，决定由筹备组代行辽宁省人大常委会部分职权，负责筹备辽宁省十二届人大七次会议的相关事宜。依纪依法查处辽宁拉票贿选案，充分体现了党中央全面依法治国、全面从严治党的鲜明态度和坚定决心，决不允许以任何形式破坏社会主义民主法治。	
1) We promptly and appropriately dealt with problems related to the case of election bribery in Liaoning Province, working resolutely to uphold the authority and sanctity of the system of people's congresses.

The voting bribery case in Liaoning Province was the first major case of its kind to have occurred at the provincial level since the founding of the People's Republic of China. The perpetrators seriously violated Party discipline, state laws, and the requirements of the intra-Party electoral system and the electoral system of the people's congresses. After the deputies to the Liaoning Provincial People's Congress involved in the case had their qualifications revoked in accordance with relevant laws, those who were members of the Standing Committee of the Liaoning Provincial People's Congress were removed from their positions in accordance with the law. The Standing Committee of the Liaoning Provincial People's Congress, having had over half of its members removed, was unable to convene meetings and carry out its duties. In order to promptly and appropriately resolve this unprecedented and exceptional issue, the NPC Standing Committee acted on the basis of the Constitution and relevant legal principles to make creative institutional arrangements. At the provisionally convened 23rd meeting of the NPC Standing Committee on September 13, 2016, we deliberated and approved the report of the Credentials Committee to revoke, in accordance with the law, the qualifications of 45 NPC deputies elected by the Liaoning Provincial People's Congress for bribing voters. At the meeting, we also deliberated and approved a decision stipulating that the 12th Liaoning Provincial People's Congress shall set up a preparatory committee to exercise certain functions and powers on behalf of its Standing Committee and shall take charge of the preparatory work for the convocation of its Seventh Session.

Our handling of the Liaoning case in accordance with the law and Party discipline fully reflects the Party Central Committee's clear stand and strong resolve for advancing China's law-based governance and ensuring strict Party self-governance. No violation of our socialist democracy or rule of law in any form shall be tolerated.

（二）依法对香港基本法第一百零四条作出解释，坚决反对“港独”行径。香港特别行政区是中华人民共和国不可分离的部分。“港独”的本质是分裂国家，严重违反“一国两制”方针，严重违反宪法和香港基本法。全国人大常委会行使宪法和香港基本法赋予的权力，作出关于香港基本法第一百零四条的解释，明确该条规定的“拥护中华人民共和国香港特别行政区基本法，效忠中华人民共和国香港特别行政区”，既是该条规定的宣誓必须包含的法定内容，也是参选或者出任该条所列公职的法定要求和条件；明确宣誓就职必须遵循的法定程序和内容；明确违反宣誓规定丧失就职资格的法律后果以及作出虚假宣誓或者违反誓言的法律责任。全国人大常委会主动释法，充分表明了中央贯彻“一国两制”方针的坚定决心和反对“港独”的坚定立场，充分体现了包括香港同胞在内的13亿中国人民维护国家主权、安全和发展利益的坚定意志。	
2) We produced the interpretation of Article 104 of the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region in accordance with the law to firmly oppose any attempt at secession of Hong Kong from our country.

The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region is an inseparable part of the People's Republic of China. To attempt "Hong Kong independence" is to attempt secession, a serious violation of the "one country, two systems" principle, the Constitution of China, and the Basic Law of Hong Kong. The NPC Standing Committee, exercising power entrusted to it by the Constitution and the Basic Law, produced the interpretation of Article 104 of the Basic Law of Hong Kong. The interpretation clearly establishes that, as stipulated by Article 104, to "swear to uphold the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China and swear allegiance to the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China" is not only the exact phrasing that must be included in the oath prescribed by Article 104, but is also a legal requirement and condition for any person standing for election or taking up any position of public office specified in the Article. The interpretation clarifies the legal procedures that must be adhered to when taking the oath of office and the statutory content that must be included in the oath; it makes clear that anyone who violates this stipulation on oath taking is to be legally disqualified from assuming office and that any person who makes an oath insincerely or breaks their oath will be held legally responsible.

This interpretation fully demonstrates the Chinese central leadership's resolve in upholding the "one country, two systems" principle and its firm stand against any attempt at secession of Hong Kong from the Chinese nation; it embodies the firm will of 1.3 billion Chinese people, including those in the Hong Kong region, to safeguard their country's sovereignty, security, and developmental interests.

（三）作出关于开展国家监察体制改革试点工作的决定，为重大政治体制改革提供法治保障。深化国家监察体制改革是以习近平同志为核心的党中央作出的一项重大决策，是事关全局的重大政治体制改革，对于推进党风廉政建设和反腐败斗争，推进国家治理体系和治理能力现代化，具有重大而深远的意义。为在全国推开这项重大改革探索积累经验，党中央部署在部分地方开展试点。根据“凡属重大改革都要于法有据”的精神，委员长会议依法提出相关议案，常委会经过认真审议，作出关于在北京市、山西省、浙江省开展国家监察体制改革试点工作的决定。决定明确在试点地区设立监察委员会，行使监察职权；监察委员会由本级人大产生，对本级人大及其常委会和上一级监察委员会负责，并接受监督；监察委员会按照管理权限，对本地区所有行使公权力的公职人员依法实施监察；在试点地区暂时调整或者暂时停止适用行政监察法和刑事诉讼法、地方组织法等法律的有关规定，保证改革试点工作依法有序推进。

3) We issued the decision on carrying out trials for reform of the national supervision system to provide a legal guarantee for this major political structural reform.

As a major policy decision made by the Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core to improve the political structure, deepening reform of the national supervision system has a direct bearing on the big picture and is of immense and far-reaching significance for improving Party conduct, upholding integrity, and combating corruption and for modernizing China's governance system and capacity for governance. In order to build up experience before advancing this major reform throughout the country, the Party Central Committee has decided to launch trials in several localities. In line with the principle that "all major reforms must have a legal basis," the Chairperson's Council of the NPC Standing Committee produced a proposal in accordance with the law, which was carefully deliberated by the Standing Committee and resulted in the decision to carry out trials for reforming the national supervision system in Beijing and in Shanxi and Zhejiang provinces. The decision stipulates that supervisory committees shall be established in pilot areas to exercise supervisory functions and powers; that a supervisory committee shall be created by the people's congress at the same level, and be responsible to and overseen by the same-level people's congress and its standing committee as well as the supervisory committee at the next level up; and that supervisory committees shall supervise the exercise of public power by all government employees in their regions in accordance with the law and within the scope of their supervisory authority. It also stipulates that the applicability of certain stipulations in the Law on Administrative Supervision, the Criminal Procedure Law, the Organic Law of the Local People's Congresses and Local People's Governments, and other relevant laws shall be provisionally adjusted or suspended in order to ensure law-based, orderly advancement of the pilot reform.


三、为相关领域改革提供法治保障	3. We provided a legal guarantee for relevant reforms.
常委会坚持立法和改革决策相统一、相衔接，及时修改完善涉及改革的法律，作出有关改革试点的决定，听取审议改革试点工作报告，保证改革和法治相辅相成、相互促进。	In working to bring legislation into line with China's reform, we revised and improved laws related to reform in a timely manner, issued decisions on relevant pilot reforms, and heard and deliberated reports on the progress of pilot reforms. We have thus been able to ensure that reform and rule of law complement and reinforce one another.
（一）统筹修改多部法律，持续推进行政审批制度改革。对部分法律中涉及同类事项或者同一事由需要修改的个别条款，采取一并提出法律案的方式进行统筹修改，是通过立法推动相关领域改革的重要方式之一。4年来，常委会采取统筹修法方式，审议通过了13个修法决定，涉及修改法律和有关法律问题的决定74件次。2016年审议通过关于修改节约能源法、职业病防治法等6部法律的决定，关于修改对外贸易法、海关法、煤炭法等12部法律的决定，对法律中涉及行政审批、职业资格认定等同类或者相关条款一并作出修改。	
1) We revised multiple laws using a coordinated approach, in a continued effort to support the reform of the government review and approval system.

For specific articles from different laws that deal with similar issues or the same matter and need to be revised for the sake of a reform, our approach is to issue a decision for revisions to be made across laws by putting forward multiple drafts at the same time. This is an important method we adopt to promote the relevant reform through legislation. Over the past four years, using this approach, we have deliberated and approved 13 such revision decisions, revising 74 laws and decisions on legal issues. In 2016, we deliberated and adopted the decision to revise six laws at the same time, including the Energy Conservation Law and the Law on the Prevention and Control of Occupational Diseases, as well as the decision to revise 12 laws, including the Foreign Trade Law, the Customs Law, and the Coal Industry Law. We thus made consistent changes to their articles pertaining to government review and approval or verification of professional qualifications and related matters.

（二）依法作出授权决定，为改革先行先试提供依据。常委会作出授权最高人民法院、最高人民检察院在部分地区开展刑事案件认罪认罚从宽制度试点工作的决定，确定在北京等18个城市开展试点工作。同时，总结2014年授权在上述地区开展刑事案件速裁程序试点工作的经验，将此项试点纳入认罪认罚从宽制度试点工作范围并加以扩大完善，按照新的试点办法继续试行。分别听取审议最高人民法院、最高人民检察院关于人民陪审员制度改革试点情况、关于检察机关提起公益诉讼试点情况的中期报告，要求进一步加强指导监督，全面评估试点成效，为修改完善相关法律积累经验。	
2) We issued authorization decisions in accordance with the law to provide legal basis for pilot reforms.

We authorized the Supreme People's Court and the Supreme People's Procuratorate to pilot a system of sentence bargaining in criminal cases in 18 cities including Beijing. Meanwhile, we reviewed our experiences with the pilot project of accelerated procedures for certain criminal cases that we authorized in 2014 to be carried out in these 18 cities, and incorporated this pilot project into the pilot sentence bargaining system to expand, improve, and continue running it under the new pilot system. We heard and deliberated the mid-term report of the Supreme People's Court on the pilot reform of the system of people's assessors, and that of the Supreme People's Procuratorate on the pilot reform for the filing of public interest litigation by procuratorates. We demanded that guidance and oversight be stepped up and a comprehensive evaluation of the results of these pilot reforms be made so as to accumulate experience for revising and improving relevant laws.

为依法推进公务员职务与职级并行制度改革试点、生育保险和基本医疗保险合并实施改革试点、军官制度改革试点等工作，常委会分别审议通过3个决定，暂时调整适用相关法律规定，保证在法治轨道上推进相关领域改革。	In order to ensure law-based advancement of the pilot reforms concerning a salary system for public servants based on both position and rank, incorporation of the maternity insurance into the basic medical insurance scheme, and the system of military officers, we deliberated and passed three separate decisions on making provisional adjustments to the applicability of certain stipulations in relevant laws, so as to guarantee that these pilot reforms are carried on in line with the rule of law.
（三）总结改革试点经验，通过修改完善法律予以复制和推广。常委会坚持在法治下推进改革、在改革中完善法治，对于需要先行先试的改革举措，依法授权开展试点工作；对于实践证明行之有效、具备复制推广条件的改革举措，及时总结修改完善相关法律。2013年和2014年，常委会先后两次作出决定，授权国务院在上海、广东、天津、福建自由贸易试验区暂时调整有关法律规定的行政审批。国务院在认真总结试点经验后提出议案，常委会对外资企业法等4部法律作出统筹修改，将自由贸易试验区试点的改革措施上升为法律，同时相应终止两个授权决定的法律效力。	
3) We reviewed our experiences with pilot reforms and enabled the spread of applicable practices to more regions by revising and improving relevant laws.

We have remained committed to advancing reform on the basis of rule of law and strengthening the rule of law through reform. For reform measures that require preliminary trials, we shall authorize the necessary trials in accordance with the law; for reform measures that have proved to be effective in practice and are ready to be applied to other regions, we shall act in a timely manner to review these measures and revise and improve relevant laws accordingly. In 2013 and 2014 we issued two decisions authorizing the State Council to make provisional adjustments to items requiring government review as prescribed by certain laws in the pilot free trade zones in Shanghai, Guangdong, Tianjin, and Fujian. After considering the motion that the State Council had put forward on the basis of its thorough review of experiences gained from the trials, last year we made a coordinated effort to revise the Law on Foreign-Funded Enterprises and three other laws at the same time. We thus elevated the reform measures tested out in pilot free trade zones into provisions of law, and correspondingly terminated the two authorization decisions.

四、以人民群众普遍关心的问题为重点加强执法检查和工作监督	4. We made issues of public concern the focus of our intensified efforts to inspect compliance with laws and oversee work performance.
常委会认真履行宪法法律赋予的监督权，坚持问题导向，加大监督力度，创新监督方式，增强监督实效。	We earnestly exercised the oversight powers granted to us by the Constitution and other laws. While continuing to pursue a problem-oriented approach, we intensified our oversight work and adopted new oversight methods, thereby increasing its effectiveness.
（一）把加强执法检查摆在突出位置。法律的生命力在于实施，法律的权威也在于实施。常委会把保证法律严格实施作为全面推进依法治国的重要抓手，持续加强和改进执法检查工作。4年来共开展20次执法检查。2016年检查了食品安全法、安全生产法、道路交通安全法、环境保护法、水法、促进科技成果转化法等6部法律的实施情况。	
1) We made strengthening law compliance inspections a top priority.

The vitality and authority of the law lie in its implementation. In taking the strict implementation of laws as a key task in advancing the law-based governance of China, we continued to strengthen and improve inspections of compliance with laws. Over the past four years, we have carried out a total of 20 inspections. In 2016, we inspected compliance with six laws, namely the Food Safety Law, the Law on Workplace Safety, the Road Traffic Safety Law, the Environmental Protection Law, the Water Law, and the Law on Promoting the Application of Scientific and Technological Advances.

在实践中，常委会不断深化对执法检查工作规律的认识，探索形成了包括6个环节的执法检查工作流程。一是选好执法检查题目，重点抓住经济社会发展中亟需解决、人民群众普遍关心的突出问题，检查相关法律的实施情况。二是搞好执法检查组织工作，由委员长、副委员长担任执法检查组组长，带队赴地方开展检查；坚持常委会直接检查与委托地方人大开展检查相结合，扩大执法检查的覆盖面；注重深入基层了解实际情况，把问题找准、把症结查清。三是全面报告执法检查情况，提出务实有效的建议，使执法检查报告成为解决问题、完善制度的重要依据。四是认真进行审议，常委会组成人员充分发表意见、集思广益；同时选择部分执法检查项目，结合审议开展专题询问，国务院及其有关部门负责同志到会听取意见、回答询问。五是推动改进实际工作，督促“一府两院”认真研究处理常委会执法检查报告和审议意见，切实解决突出矛盾和问题；有关专门委员会进行跟踪监督。六是要求“一府两院”报告整改落实情况，常委会根据实际情况安排进行审议。这6个环节形成对法律实施情况的“全链条”监督工作流程，切实增强了人大监督工作的系统性、针对性和有效性。	
Through practice, we have continuously deepened our understanding of the patterns that underpin the work of inspecting compliance with laws, and have developed a procedure for this work, which consists of the following six steps:

First, the subject of the inspection is determined. Inspections will focus on laws related to issues of pressing importance for economic and social development and of common concern among the people.

Second, inspection is well organized. I, as Chairman, and the vice chairpersons of the Standing Committee lead inspection groups in inspecting law compliance in various localities. We make use of both inspections by the Standing Committee and inspections by local people's congresses entrusted by us, so as to expand the coverage of inspection. We emphasize the importance of visiting the community level to see real conditions there, so as to ensure problems are accurately identified.

Third, a comprehensive report detailing inspection results is produced. The report should contain practical and effective suggestions and serve as an important basis on which problems can be addressed and relevant systems improved.

Fourth, thorough deliberation on the inspection report is carried out. Members of the Standing Committee fully express their opinions and pool their knowledge. If necessary, a special inquiry is organized based on the deliberation, with leading officials from the State Council and its relevant departments in attendance to hear comments and answer questions.

Fifth, impetus is provided to the improvement of actual work. We urge the State Council, the Supreme People's Court, and the Supreme People's Procuratorate to carefully examine and handle our inspection and deliberation results and adopt effective measures to resolve pronounced problems, with relevant special committees of the NPC exercising follow-up oversight.

Sixth, the State Council, the Supreme People's Court, and the Supreme People's Procuratorate are required to report on their rectification work. We then make arrangements for deliberating their reports in view of actual conditions.

These six steps form a complete process for carrying out oversight on the implementation of laws, enabling our oversight work to become more systematic, targeted, and effective.

（二）着力提升人民群众生产生活安全感。常委会对公共安全领域的3部法律开展执法检查并进行专题询问，推动各级政府牢固树立和贯彻落实以人为本、安全发展理念，努力让人民群众吃得安全、出行安全、工作安全。	
2) We helped ensure the people's safety in life and work.

We inspected compliance with three laws in the field of public safety and carried out special inquiries on them. We urged governments at all levels to affirm and practice the principle of putting people first and pursuing safe development, and to work hard to guarantee food, transportation, and workplace safety.

民以食为天，食以安为先。常委会贯彻落实习近平总书记提出的“坚持最严谨的标准、最严格的监管、最严厉的处罚、最严肃的问责”的要求，在全国范围内检查食品安全法实施情况，涉及“从农田到餐桌”的各个环节，突出食用农产品、婴幼儿配方乳粉等重点领域和幼儿园、学校等集中用餐单位，抓住食品安全监管中的薄弱环节和小作坊小摊贩、网络订餐中的突出问题，就确保人民群众“舌尖上的安全”认真负责地提出意见建议。国务院高度重视，制定《“十三五”国家食品安全规划》。各地方积极加强监管体制和能力建设，严厉整治食品生产经营突出问题。食品药品监管部门查处违法违规案件10.6万件，公安部门破获食品安全犯罪案件8300余起。18个省（区、市）就规范食品生产加工小作坊小摊贩制定或修改了地方性法规和政府规章。	Food is the most basic necessity of the people, and safety must be the top priority in food production. Putting into practice General Secretary Xi Jinping's requirements of applying the strictest possible standards, oversight, punishment, and accountability to ensure food safety, we inspected compliance with the Food Safety Law nationwide, covering every step from farm to table. Special attention was given to key areas such as edible agricultural products and infant formula, to places where groups of people eat together such as kindergartens and schools, to weak links in food safety oversight and supervision, and to prominent problems in the regulation of food vendors, small-scale food production sites, and online food ordering. On the basis of the inspection, we put forward responsible suggestions and comments to help ensure that every bite of food is safe. Giving earnest consideration to our comments and suggestions, the State Council developed the National Plan for the 13th Five-Year Plan Period for Food Safety. Local authorities also acted promptly to strengthen their oversight institutions and capability for ensuring food safety, and adopted strong measures to tackle prominent problems in food production and sale. Food and drug supervisory and regulatory authorities investigated and handled 106,000 violations of laws or regulations. Public security agencies uncovered more than 8,300 food safety offences. A total of 18 provincial-level governments introduced new, or revised existing, local statutes and regulations to better regulate food production and processing by small producers and vendors.
在安全生产法执法检查中，执法检查组深入矿山井下、生产车间、建筑工地，听取一线员工意见，强调发展决不能以牺牲安全为代价，要求有关方面强化和落实生产经营单位的主体责任，依法严惩安全生产违法违规行为，深化重点行业领域专项治理。在道路交通安全法执法检查中，针对货车非法改装、超限超载，电动自行车普遍超标，农村道路交通安全设施不足等突出问题，执法检查组通过暗查暗访、实地体验、问卷调查等多种形式深入了解情况，要求严格道路交通安全执法监管，严肃整治违法生产、销售、使用车辆行为。在专题询问中，常委会组成人员同国务院及其有关部门负责人面对面交流，探究问题根源，共商改进举措，确保人民群众生产生活安全。	
When inspecting compliance with the Law on Workplace Safety, inspection groups entered mines, factory workshops, and construction sites, so as to hear firsthand what the people in the field had to say and stress the importance of never sacrificing safety for the sake of development. Based on what we learned from the inspection, we urged relevant authorities to ensure production and operations entities have fulfilled their primary responsibilities, impose in accordance with the law stringent punishments for violations of workplace safety laws or regulations, and intensify focused efforts to tackle problems in key industries and sectors.

When inspecting compliance with the Road Traffic Safety Law, we targeted prominent issues such as trucks being illegally modified or carrying oversized and overweight loads, electric bikes exceeding stipulated standards, and deficiencies in traffic safety facilities on rural roads. Inspection groups acquired an in-depth understanding of the situation through a variety of methods such as unannounced visits and investigations, field surveys, and questionnaires. We required that supervision and oversight over the enforcement of the law be strengthened and serious measures be taken to stop illegal production, sale, and use of vehicles.

During the special inquiries that followed the law compliance inspections, members of the Standing Committee had face-to-face discussions with leading officials of the State Council and its relevant departments to get to the root of the problems and discuss measures for improvement so as to ensure people's safety in life and work.

（三）积极推动改善和保护生态环境。常委会积极回应人民群众对良好生态环境的热切期待，2014年全面修订环境保护法，2016年又检查这部法律实施情况并开展专题询问，首次听取审议国务院关于年度环境状况和环境保护目标完成情况的报告。要求有关方面全面贯彻实施环境保护法律制度，着力解决人民群众反映强烈的大气、水、土壤等方面的突出环境问题，让老百姓切实感受到环境质量的改善；督促地方各级政府依法向本级人大及其常委会报告年度环境状况和环境保护目标完成情况，自觉接受人大和人民群众监督。	
3) We gave impetus to ecological and environmental conservation and improvements.

In actively responding to the people's earnest expectation for a good environment, in 2014 we comprehensively revised the Environmental Protection Law; in 2016, we inspected compliance with this law and held a special inquiry following the inspection, and for the first time, heard and deliberated the State Council's report on the state of the environment and the fulfillment of environmental protection targets. We required relevant authorities to ensure full enforcement of environmental protection laws and regulations and put great effort into addressing the environmental problems which are of great concern to the people, such as air, water, and soil pollution, so that the people can really feel improvements in the environment. We urged local governments at all levels to make annual reports on the state of the environment and the fulfillment of their environmental protection targets to people's congresses at the same level and their standing committees in accordance with the law, and to willingly accept oversight by people's congresses and the public.

绿水青山就是金山银山。常委会检查水法实施情况，开展水污染防治法专题调研，听取审议国务院关于自然保护区建设和管理工作情况的报告，要求落实最严格的水资源管理制度，加强水生态保护和水环境治理，推进水资源可持续利用，加快自然生态系统保护和修复工作，努力实现青山常在、绿水长流。	Lush mountains and lucid waters are as valuable as gold and silver. We inspected compliance with the Water Law, carried out research investigations on the implementation of the Law on the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution, and heard and deliberated the State Council's report on the establishment and management of nature reserves. We required that the strictest possible management system for water resources be put into action, the protection of water ecosystems and management of water environments be strengthened, sustainable use of water resources be guaranteed, and efforts to protect and restore natural ecosystems be accelerated, so that we can forever keep our mountains green and our waters clear.
（四）促进经济社会平稳健康发展。常委会紧紧围绕党中央关于经济工作的重大决策部署，加强经济工作监督和预算决算审查监督。听取审议国务院关于计划执行情况报告以及国有资产管理与体制改革情况、农林科技创新工作情况等报告，检查促进科技成果转化法的实施情况。强调要积极适应把握引领经济发展新常态，坚定推进供给侧结构性改革，做好“三去一降一补”工作，大力实施创新驱动发展战略，加快实现新旧发展动能转换，切实防范和化解风险，确保实现“十三五”良好开局。	
4) We helped to ensure steady and sound economic and social development.

We kept firmly in mind the Party Central Committee's major decisions and plans on economic work, as we worked to strengthen oversight of economic work as well as review and oversight of government budgets and final accounts. We heard and deliberated the State Council's reports on the implementation of the plan for national economic and social development, on the management of state-owned assets and reform of their management system, and on scientific and technological innovation in agriculture and forestry. We inspected the implementation of the Law on Promoting the Application of Scientific and Technological Advances. We emphasized that the government should adapt to, approach in the right way, and steer the new normal in economic development; press ahead with supply-side structural reform; ensure substantive progress in cutting overcapacity, reducing excess inventory, deleveraging, lowering costs, and strengthening areas of weakness; put great effort into pursuing innovation-driven development; work quickly to replace old drivers of growth with new ones; effectively guard against and defuse risks; and ensure a good start to the 13th Five-Year Plan.

常委会听取审议中央决算报告、审计工作报告、预算执行情况报告，审查批准2015年中央决算、2016年中央预算调整方案，听取审议关于审计查出问题整改情况报告、深化财政转移支付制度改革情况报告。要求落实好积极财政政策，加快推进财税体制改革和相关立法工作，规范预算决算编制和管理，提高财政转移支付绩效和透明度，加强地方政府债务管理。制定《关于建立预算审查前听取人大代表和社会各界意见建议的机制的意见》，拓宽代表和公众对预算审查工作的参与。	We heard and deliberated the State Council's reports on the final accounts of the central government, on budget implementation, and on auditing work, and examined and approved the 2015 central government final accounts and the revision of the 2016 central government budget. We heard and deliberated the State Council's reports on the rectification of problems discovered in auditing and on the progress achieved in deepening reform of the system of transfer payments. We required that the proactive fiscal policy be well implemented, reform of fiscal and tax systems and relevant legislative initiatives be accelerated, the compilation and management of budgets and final accounts be put under standard procedures, the effectiveness and transparency of transfer payments be raised, and management of local government debt be strengthened. To see greater participation of deputies and the public in the work of budget review, we formulated the guidelines on establishing a mechanism for soliciting opinions from deputies and people from all sectors of society before government budgets are reviewed.
常委会还听取审议了高等教育改革与发展工作情况的报告、出境入境管理法执行情况的报告，开展民族区域自治法配套法规制定和实施情况等专题调研。	We also heard and deliberated the State Council's reports on the progress of the reform and development of higher education and on the enforcement of the Law on Entry and Exit Administration. We conducted research on the development and implementation of supporting rules and regulations for the Law on Regional Ethnic Autonomy.
（五）大力弘扬宪法精神。常委会全面贯彻实施宪法宣誓制度，依法组织6次宪法宣誓仪式，25名国家工作人员在就职时公开进行宪法宣誓，彰显了宪法尊严和权威。在第三个国家宪法日到来之际，习近平总书记对“五四宪法”历史资料陈列馆作出重要指示，强调开展宪法宣传教育是全面依法治国的重要任务。常委会办公厅会同中央有关部门和浙江省人大常委会在杭州举办国家宪法日座谈会，推动学习宣传宪法、贯彻实施宪法。	
5) We worked hard to promote the spirit of the Constitution.

We comprehensively implemented the system of pledging allegiance to the Constitution. We organized, in accordance with the law, six ceremonies for 25 officials to publicly pledge allegiance to the Constitution when they took office, demonstrating the sanctity and authority of the Constitution. On the occasion of the third National Constitution Day, and the opening of a history exhibition hall for the 1954 Constitution in Hangzhou, General Secretary Xi Jinping gave important instructions, stressing that raising public awareness of the Constitution is an important task in advancing the law-based governance of China. The General Office of the NPC Standing Committee, together with relevant departments of the central authorities and the Standing Committee of the Zhejiang Provincial People's Congress, organized a National Constitution Day seminar in Hangzhou to spread knowledge of the Constitution and promote its implementation.

常委会听取审议国务院关于“六五”普法决议执行情况的报告，作出关于开展第七个五年法治宣传教育的决议，要求深入学习宣传习近平总书记关于全面依法治国的重要论述，抓住领导干部这个“关键少数”，促进国家工作人员和全社会尊法学法守法用法，树立宪法法律权威。	We heard and deliberated the State Council's report on the implementation of the resolution on the sixth five-year initiative to popularize knowledge of the law, and adopted a resolution on launching the seventh five-year initiative to raise public awareness of the rule of law. We required that great effort be made to understand and communicate General Secretary Xi Jinping's major expositions on comprehensively advancing the law-based governance of China, give play to the role of the "critical minority" consisting of leading officials in promoting the practice of respecting, studying, abiding by, and applying the law throughout society and particularly among public servants, and affirm the authority of the Constitution and other laws.
常委会高度重视促进司法公正，听取审议最高人民法院关于深化司法公开情况的报告、最高人民检察院关于加强侦查监督情况的报告，积极推动深化司法体制改革，强化司法公开，规范司法行为，提高司法公信力。	Attaching great importance to ensuring judicial impartiality, we heard and deliberated the report of the Supreme People's Court on enhancing judicial openness and the report of the Supreme People's Procuratorate on strengthening oversight of investigative activities. We helped improve judicial credibility through our efforts to promote deepened reform of the judicial system, increase judicial openness, and standardize judicial behavior.
研究制定规范性文件备案审查工作规程，推动备案审查工作规范化、制度化。一年来，对 “一府两院” 报备的30多件行政法规、司法解释逐件进行审查，研究处理各方面提出的审查建议92件，对发现的与法律不一致的问题进行监督纠正，维护国家法制统一。	We formulated the procedures for recording and reviewing normative documents to standardize and institutionalize this work. Over the past year, we reviewed every one of the 30-plus administrative regulations and judicial interpretations submitted by the State Council, the Supreme People's Court, and the Supreme People's Procuratorate, handling 92 suggestions on the review work from various departments. We conducted oversight to ensure correction of provisions discovered to be inconsistent with the law, so as to safeguard the unity of the country's legal system.


五、支持和保障人大代表发挥主体作用	5. We worked to see that deputies to the NPC fully played their principal role.
常委会把充分发挥代表作用作为增强人大工作活力的重要抓手，不断深化和拓展代表工作。	We regarded giving full play to the role of deputies as an important measure for boosting the vitality of the NPC's work, and have continued to deepen and expand our work related to deputies.
（一）密切常委会同代表、代表同人民群众的联系。贯彻落实委员长会议组成人员、常委会委员联系代表工作意见，加强常委会同代表的联系。实现代表列席常委会会议、参加执法检查、参与专门委员会和工作委员会活动常态化。4年来，共邀请代表1270多人次列席常委会会议、1200多人次参加执法检查等活动。推动“一府两院”加强同代表的联系，2016年国务院及其有关部门邀请代表1700余人次参加调研、座谈，最高人民法院、最高人民检察院组织600多名代表参加调研活动。出台《关于完善人大代表联系人民群众制度的实施意见》，推动建立代表联系人民群众的工作平台和网络平台，健全代表反映人民群众意见和要求的处理反馈机制。	
1) We worked to see better communication between the Standing Committee and deputies and between deputies and the people.

We implemented the guidelines for ensuring members of the Chairperson's Council and members of the Standing Committee maintain close contact with NPC deputies. This has helped us to strengthen our ties with deputies. We made it a regular practice for deputies to observe Standing Committee meetings, participate in law compliance inspections, and join the activities of special committees of the NPC and working committees of the Standing Committee. Over the past four years, we saw a cumulative deputy attendance of over 1,270 at Standing Committee meetings in a nonvoting capacity, as well as an attendance of over 1,200 in law compliance inspections and other activities. We urged the State Council, the Supreme People's Court, and the Supreme People's Procuratorate to strengthen their contact with deputies. In 2016, the State Council and its relevant departments invited over 1,700 deputy participants in their research activities and discussions, and the Supreme People's Court and the Supreme People's Procuratorate involved over 600 deputies in their research projects. We issued the guidelines on improving the system by which deputies to people's congresses maintain contact with the people. For this purpose, we advanced the development of venues and online platforms enabling deputies to develop closer ties with the public, and improved the mechanism for relevant government departments to process and give feedback on the proposals and requests of the public passed on to them by deputies.

（二）增强代表议案审议和建议办理实效。十二届全国人大四次会议主席团交付有关专门委员会审议的462件代表议案，已全部完成审议工作。其中，32件议案涉及的10个立法项目，已经常委会通过；26件议案涉及的7个立法项目，已提请常委会审议；123件议案涉及的42个立法项目，已列入立法计划或立法规划。代表提出的8609件建议、批评和意见已全部办理完毕，建议所提问题得到解决或者计划逐步解决的占80.6%。“一府两院”和有关方面高度重视代表建议办理工作，常委会办公厅和有关专门委员会认真协调督办。国务院常务会议多次听取办理人大代表建议情况的汇报，要求把建议办理作为常态化年度重点任务，加强与代表沟通，及时回应关切，更好接受监督，推进科学决策。代表提出的意见建议，在有关部门制定政策、开展工作中得到认真研究和采纳。	
2) We improved our efficiency in examining deputies' proposals and ensuring handling of their suggestions.

Relevant special committees completed their examination of all 462 proposals referred to them by the Presidium of the Fourth Session of the 12th NPC. Of these, we have adopted 10 legislative items addressed in 32 of the submitted proposals; are deliberating 7 legislative items addressed in 26 of the proposals; and have included 42 legislative items discussed in 123 of the proposals in our annual legislative plan or five-year legislative program. All 8,609 suggestions, criticisms, and comments submitted by deputies have been handled, and 80.6% of the problems raised therein have been resolved or have been scheduled for gradual resolution.

The State Council, the Supreme People's Court, the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and relevant government departments attached great significance to the handling of deputies' suggestions, and the General Office of the Standing Committee and relevant special committees of the NPC worked conscientiously to coordinate and oversee this work. The State Council convened multiple executive meetings to hear reports on the handling of deputies' suggestions, and put forth the requirement that relevant departments make the handling of deputies' suggestions a standard and high-priority annual task, strengthen their communication with deputies, promptly respond to deputies' concerns, and accept deputies' oversight so as to ensure sound decision-making. In short, the comments and suggestions of deputies were seriously considered and adopted by relevant government departments as they developed policies and carried out their work.

（三）加强代表思想作风和素质能力建设。精心制定代表学习培训计划并认真组织实施，把学习贯彻党的十八届六中全会精神、加强代表思想作风建设纳入培训内容。举办全国人大代表专题学习班3期、专题研讨班1期，1000余名代表参加学习。组织代表专题调研和集中视察，取得一批重要调研成果，推动了相关工作。	
3) We helped deputies improve their thinking, work style, and capabilities.

We meticulously formulated and carried out study and training plans for deputies, helping them grasp and put into practice the guidelines of the Sixth Plenary Session of the 18th Party Central Committee and improve their thinking and work style. Last year we organized three study sessions and one seminar on special topics, which were attended by more than 1,000 deputies. We also organized research projects and inspection tours for deputies, which yielded a number of fruitful results and helped to move forward work in relevant fields.

六、充分发挥人大对外交往服务国家大局的作用	6. We gave full expression to the NPC's role in serving China's overall interests through its international exchanges.
坚持服从服务于国家发展和外交工作大局，统筹谋划和积极推进人大对外交往工作。巩固和完善与有关国家议会定期交流机制，中国全国人大已与俄罗斯、美国、英国、印度、巴西、南非等20个国家议会和欧洲议会建立定期交流机制或政治对话，2016年同肯尼亚、以色列议会分别建立合作机制。委员长会议组成人员率团访问赞比亚、法国、芬兰、越南等19个国家，保持与往访国高层交往良好势头。全国人大常委会委员长首次出席各国议会联盟大会并发表讲话，就促进和平发展、国际关系民主化提出中国主张，提升了中国全国人大的国际影响力。拓展议会多边外交形式，首次与各国议会联盟共同在华举办亚非国家议员研讨班。全面深化专门委员会、双边友好小组、工作机构以及地方人大等多层次对外交流合作。继续组织全国人大西藏代表团主动开展对外交流。2016年，共接待55个外国议会代表团和其他来访团。	
We remained committed to the principle of complying with and working for China's overall development interests and diplomatic work. We carried out overall planning for and greatly advanced the NPC's foreign relations work.

We strengthened and improved the mechanism of regular exchanges with foreign parliaments. The NPC has a mechanism for regular exchanges or carries out political dialogue with the parliaments of 20 countries including Russia, the United States, the United Kingdom, India, Brazil, and South Africa, as well as with the European Parliament. Last year, we established mechanisms for cooperation with the parliaments of Kenya and Israel.

Delegations headed by members of the Chairperson's Council visited 19 countries including Zambia, France, Finland, and Vietnam, helping maintain the positive momentum of high-level exchanges with these countries. As Chairman of the Standing Committee of the NPC, I attended the Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), at which I delivered a speech presenting China's stand on promoting peaceful development of the world and greater democracy in international relations. The attendance of the Chairman of the NPC Standing Committee at the IPU Assembly for the first time in history has helped to greatly increase the international influence of the NPC.

We explored new forms of multilateral parliamentary diplomatic activities, working together with the IPU to hold, in China for the first time, a seminar for members of parliaments of Asian and African countries. We stepped up foreign exchanges and cooperation at various other levels, such as those conducted by NPC special committees, bilateral friendship groups, working bodies of the Standing Committee, and local people's congresses. We continued to arrange for the NPC Tibetan Delegation to proactively conduct foreign exchanges. Over the past year, we received 55 parliamentary or other delegations.

立足于人大自身特点和优势，不断丰富对外交往的内涵，着力拓展对外交往的深度。一是推动落实国家领导人达成的重要共识，巩固和增进政治互信，相互尊重彼此核心利益和重大关切，不断夯实国家关系发展的政治基础。二是促进以互利共赢为基础的各领域务实合作，推动“一带一路”建设与有关国家发展战略对接，敦促有关国家议会为双边务实合作和人员往来提供良好法律保障和政策环境。三是服务国家发展战略和民主法治建设需要，深化治国理政经验交流，借鉴外国有益立法经验，加强对我国重要立法项目的正面解读。四是讲好中国故事，传播中国理念、中国经验和中国方案，增进国际社会对中国发展道路和内外政策的理解和认同。五是针对个别国家在台湾、涉藏、南海等问题上的错误言行，通过发表声明、谈话等形式坚定维护国家主权、安全和发展利益。	
Based on the NPC's unique features and strengths, we put great effort into improving its foreign relations work in both scope and depth.

First, we strived to ensure that the consensus achieved between Chinese and foreign leaders is upheld, and worked to consolidate and enhance mutual political trust and foster mutual respect of each other's core interests and major concerns, thus strengthening the political basis for the development of China's relations with these countries.

Second, we worked to promote mutually beneficial practical cooperation with other countries across various fields. We helped increase the complementarity between the development strategies of China and other countries concerned in the Belt and Road Initiative, and urged the parliaments of these countries to provide legal guarantees and favorable policy environments for bilateral pragmatic cooperation and personnel exchange.

Third, in working to serve China's development strategy and the development of its democracy and rule of law, we strengthened international exchanges on the topic of state governance, learned from other countries' legislative experiences, and stepped up our work of explaining China's major legislative items to the outside world.

Fourth, by telling stories of China well and spreading Chinese visions, experience, and approaches, we have been able to see better understanding and wider recognition of China's development path and foreign and domestic policies in the international community.

Fifth, in responding to false statements and inappropriate actions by certain countries regarding the Taiwan question and issues concerning Tibet and the South China Sea, we resolutely safeguarded China's sovereignty, security, and developmental interests by issuing statements, engaging talks, and taking other actions.

决定条约和重要协定的批准，是全国人大常委会的一项法定职权。《巴黎协定》是近年来气候变化多边进程的最重要成果。常委会审议批准该协定，彰显我国作为发展中大国的责任担当，有利于我国在气候变化多边进程中发挥更重要的作用。	Ratifying treaties and agreements concluded with foreign countries is a legally mandated duty of the NPC Standing Committee. The Paris Agreement has been the most important achievement of the multilateral efforts to address climate change in recent years. We deliberated and ratified this agreement, which demonstrates China's willingness to shoulder its responsibilities as a large developing country and enables China to play an even bigger role in multilateral initiatives on climate change.
七、大力加强自身建设	7. We intensified self-improvement efforts.
常委会始终把思想政治建设摆在首位，坚定理想信念，坚定中国特色社会主义道路自信、理论自信、制度自信、文化自信，切实增强责任感和使命感。认真开展“两学一做”学习教育，自觉用马克思主义中国化最新成果武装头脑、指导实践、推动工作。办好常委会专题讲座，努力提高依法履职能力和水平。贯彻落实全面从严治党要求，扎实推进党风廉政建设和反腐败斗争，严格执行中央八项规定精神，持续深入改进作风。完善出席会议情况通报制度，努力提高审议质量。全国人大机关自觉接受中央专项巡视监督，严肃认真抓好巡视整改，全面加强机关建设和工作。	
We have continuously given top priority to improving our thinking and theoretical competence, held firm to ideals and convictions, stayed confident in the path, theory, system, and culture of Chinese socialism, and strengthened our sense of responsibility and mission. We threw ourselves into the Party-wide drive to help Party members better meet Party standards by studying the Party Constitution, Party regulations, and General Secretary Xi Jinping's policy addresses, and consciously equipped ourselves with the latest achievements in adapting Marxism to Chinese conditions and used them to guide our practice and advance our work.

We successfully organized Standing Committee seminars and strived to improve our capability for better performing our duties in accordance with the law. We strived to meet the requirements related to ensuring strict Party self-governance in every respect; made solid progress in improving Party conduct, promoting integrity, and fighting corruption; strictly implemented the Party Central Committee's eight-point decision on improving Party and government conduct; and continued to improve our work style. We improved the system for reporting attendance of meetings, and worked hard to raise the quality of deliberation. Administrative bodies of the Standing Committee and special committees willingly accepted the special inspection and oversight by the central discipline inspection team and conscientiously worked to rectify problems identified in the inspection, thus improving themselves and their work in all respects.

常委会加强对各专门委员会的领导，注重发挥专门委员会的重要作用。各专门委员会认真履行法定职责，牵头组织起草一批重要法律草案，组织实施执法检查，深入开展调查研究，做了大量富有成效的工作。常委会党组在全国人大各专门委员会设立分党组，加强专门委员会党的建设。	We strengthened leadership over the work of special committees and stressed the need for them to fulfill their crucial role. Special committees earnestly carried out their legally mandated duties and did a great deal of productive work, such as taking the lead in organizing the drafting of major legislative items, organizing inspections of compliance with laws, and carrying out in-depth research and studies. The Leading Party Members' Group of the Standing Committee set up branch groups in special committees to strengthen their work in relation to Party building.
各位代表！	Fellow Deputies,
全国人大常委会工作取得的成绩，是在以习近平同志为核心的党中央正确领导下，全国人大代表、常委会组成人员、各专门委员会组成人员和全国人大机关工作人员兢兢业业、履职尽责、扎实工作的结果，是国务院、最高人民法院、最高人民检察院和地方各级人大及其常委会密切配合、团结协作的结果，是全国各族人民充分信任、大力支持的结果。在此，我代表全国人大常委会表示崇高的敬意和衷心的感谢！	The Standing Committee's achievements this past year have been made under the sound leadership of the Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core. They are the result of the careful, diligent, and hard work of all NPC deputies, members of the NPC Standing Committee and special committees, and the staff of the administrative bodies of the Standing Committee and special committees; the close coordination and cooperation of the State Council, the Supreme People's Court, the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and local people's congresses at all levels and their standing committees; and the full trust and great support of the entire Chinese people. On behalf of the Standing Committee, I would like to express our highest respect for and sincere gratitude to them all.
回顾过去一年的工作，我们清醒地认识到，常委会工作中还存在一些差距和不足。在立法任务越来越重、节奏越来越快、要求越来越高的新形势下，立法的针对性和有效性需要进一步增强；针对有法不依、执法不严、违法不究等突出问题，监督的力度需要进一步加大、方式有待进一步完善；常委会联系人大代表、代表联系人民群众的工作有待进一步深化，委员和代表思想作风建设需要进一步加强。我们要高度重视这些问题，虚心听取代表和各方面的意见建议，自觉接受监督，不断加强和改进各项工作。	In reviewing what we achieved over the past year, we are keenly aware that the work of the Standing Committee still has room for improvement. We still need to make legislation more targeted and effective under the new circumstances, where legislation initiatives are growing in number and the pace of and requirements for legislation are increasing. We need to increase the intensity and improve the methods of our oversight work to address the prominent problems of non-compliance with laws, lax law enforcement, and failure to prosecute violations of the law. We need to see better communication between the Standing Committee and deputies and between deputies and the public, and improve the thinking and work style of deputies and members of the Standing Committee. We must take these problems seriously and strive to improve our work in all respects by listening to comments and suggestions from deputies and all sectors of society with an open mind and willingly accepting their oversight.


今后一年的主要任务	Major Tasks for This Year
2017年，中国共产党将召开具有重大而深远意义的第十九次全国代表大会，这是党和国家政治生活中的头等大事。2017年是全面实施“十三五”规划、全面建成小康社会的重要一年。做好今年人大工作意义重大。全国人大常委会工作的总体要求是：在以习近平同志为核心的党中央坚强领导下，全面贯彻党的十八大和十八届三中、四中、五中、六中全会精神，以邓小平理论、“三个代表”重要思想、科学发展观为指导，深入学习贯彻习近平总书记系列重要讲话精神和治国理政新理念新思想新战略，坚持稳中求进工作总基调，维护宪法法律权威，加强重点领域立法，着力提高立法质量，实行正确监督、有效监督，支持和保障代表依法履职，圆满完成本届全国人大及其常委会各项任务，以优异成绩迎接党的十九大胜利召开。	
In 2017, the Communist Party of China will convene its 19th National Congress, the most important political event of the year for the Party and the country and an event of far-reaching significance. 2017 is also an important year for the implementation of China's 13th Five-Year Plan and for the country's advancement toward finishing building a moderately prosperous society in all respects. It is therefore extremely important that the NPC accomplishes all of its work for the year well.

The overall requirements for the work of the NPC Standing Committee this year are as follows:

-- Uphold the firm leadership of the Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core

-- Implement fully the guidelines from the 18th National Party Congress and those of the third through sixth plenary sessions of the 18th Party Central Committee

-- Take as our guide Deng Xiaoping Theory, the Theory of Three Represents, and the Scientific Outlook on Development

-- Fully grasp and put into practice the principles from General Secretary Xi Jinping's major addresses and his new vision, thinking, and strategies for the governance of China

-- Remain committed to the underlying principle of making progress while keeping performance stable

-- Safeguard the authority of the Constitution and other laws

-- Strengthen legislation in key areas, with the focus on raising the quality of legislation

-- Deliver proper and effective oversight

-- Support and ensure deputies' law-based performance of their duties

-- Ensure successful accomplishment of all the work of the current NPC and its Standing Committee

-- Greet the convocation of the 19th National Party Congress with great achievements

This year, we will ensure fulfillment of the following tasks.

一、以良法促进发展、保证善治	1. Produce effective legislation to promote development and help ensure good governance
法律是治国之重器，良法是善治之前提。十二届全国人大及其常委会紧紧围绕建设中国特色社会主义法治体系，认真行使国家立法权，坚持立改废释并举，遵循和把握立法规律，不断提高立法工作水平。	The law is of great value to the governance of a country, and good laws are a prerequisite for good governance. With a view toward putting in place a socialist rule of law system with Chinese characteristics, the 12th NPC and its Standing Committee have conscientiously exercised state legislative powers, enacting, revising, repealing, and interpreting laws as necessary. By grasping and following the principles of legislative work, we have been able to continuously improve it.
总结近年来的实践经验，做好人大立法工作要着重把握好以下几点：一是坚持党对立法工作的领导，全面贯彻落实党中央确定的立法工作目标任务，立法中的重要事项和重大问题，由常委会党组及时向党中央请示报告。二是发挥立法的引领和推动作用，坚持法治和改革协同推进，坚持法治和德治协同发力，将社会主义核心价值观融入法治建设，为改革发展稳定提供法治保障。三是发挥人大在立法工作中的主导作用，完善立法体制机制，加强立法工作组织协调，增强立法的及时性、系统性、针对性、有效性。四是深入推进科学立法、民主立法，恪守以民为本、立法为民理念，广泛凝聚立法共识，发挥立法机关在表达、平衡、调整社会利益方面的重要作用。	
In reviewing the experience gained in recent years, we have realized that to do our legislative work well we must adhere to the following principles:

First, uphold the Party's leadership over legislative work. We must work in line with the objectives and tasks set by the Party Central Committee for China's legislative work. The Leading Party Members' Group of the Standing Committee must promptly request instructions from and submit reports to the Party Central Committee on major issues and matters in legislation.

Second, allow legislation to play its guiding and driving role. We must remain committed to coordinating the advancement of both rule of law and reform and to ensuring rule of law and rule of virtue work in concert with one another. We must instill core socialist values into the development of the rule of law, and develop the rule of law to provide a guarantee for the country's reform, development, and stability.

Third, ensure the NPC plays its dominant role in legislative work. We need to improve legislative systems and mechanisms, strengthen organization and coordination in relation to legislative work, and make this work more timely, systematic, targeted, and effective.

Fourth, legislate more effectively and democratically. In line with the idea of putting the people first in legislation and making legislation for them, we must build up broad consensus on legislation and ensure that legislative bodies properly fulfill their important role of voicing, balancing, and adjusting the interests of different sectors of society.

新的一年，常委会要更好坚持上述行之有效的立法工作思路、原则和方式方法，加强重点领域立法，加强涉及改革的法律立改废释工作，着力提高立法质量，确保顺利完成立法工作目标任务。一是贯彻落实党中央关于深化国家监察体制改革的决策部署，将行政监察法修改为国家监察法，为构建集中统一、权威高效的国家监察体系提供法治保障。二是围绕构建发展新体制完善法律制度。在民法总则出台后，加快推进民法典各分编的编纂工作，强化对民事权利的保护，完善平等保护产权等法律制度；落实税收法定原则，制定烟叶税法、船舶吨税法等单行税法；制定电子商务法，修改反不正当竞争法、中小企业促进法、农民专业合作社法、证券法、标准化法等，着力健全现代市场体系。三是加强社会、文化、生态等方面法律制度建设。制定社区矫正法、基本医疗卫生法、公共图书馆法，完善社会治理体制，推进健康中国建设，保障人民文化权益；制定土壤污染防治法，修改水污染防治法，促进生态文明建设；制定核安全法、国家情报法、国际刑事司法协助法，修改测绘法；修改人民法院组织法、人民检察院组织法。四是做好与改革试点授权决定相关的工作。	
This coming year, we will better adhere to the above mentioned ways of thinking, principles, and methods, given their proven effectiveness in our legislative work. We will strengthen both legislation in key areas and work regarding the enactment, revision, abolition, and interpretation of laws related to reform. We will raise the quality of legislation and ensure that the objectives and tasks set for legislative work are met and accomplished.

First, we will carry out the decision and plan of the Party Central Committee on deepening reform of the national supervision system. This means that we will revise the Law on Administrative Supervision to turn it into a national supervision law, so as to provide a legal guarantee for our efforts to put in place a centralized, unified, authoritative, and highly-efficient national supervision system.

Second, we will improve the legal system with a view toward building new systems for development. After issuing the General Provisions of Civil Law, we will step up our work on compiling the individual books of a civil code. We will strengthen protection of civil law rights and improve our system of laws and regulations concerning equal protection of property rights. To ensure law-based taxation, we will formulate laws on specific taxes, such as a tobacco leaf tax law and a tonnage tax law. To improve the modern market system, we will work on establishing an e-commerce law and revising several laws, including the Anti-Unfair Competition Law, the Law on Promoting Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises, the Law on Farmers' Specialized Cooperatives, the Securities Law, and the Standardization Law.

Third, we will strengthen the development of laws and regulations concerning social, cultural, ecological, and other issues. We will formulate a community correction law, a basic medical and health care law, and a law on public libraries, so as to improve the social governance system, push forward the building of a Healthy China, and guarantee the people's cultural rights and interests. To promote ecological progress, we will enact a law for the prevention and control of soil pollution and revise the Law on the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution. We will formulate a nuclear safety law, an intelligence law, and a law on international judicial assistance in criminal matters, and revise the Surveying and Mapping Law. We will also revise the Organic Law of the People's Courts and the Organic Law of the People's Procuratorates.

Fourth, we will effectively carry out work concerning the authorization of pilot reforms.

二、实行正确监督、有效监督	2. Deliver proper and effective oversight
全国人大及其常委会监督“一府两院”的工作和宪法法律的实施，是人民代表大会制度的内在要求和制度安排，体现了国家一切权力属于人民的宪法原则。十二届全国人大常委会切实把宪法法律赋予的监督权用起来，把实行正确监督、有效监督作为开展监督工作的基本遵循，不断深化对人大监督工作定位和规律的认识。实行正确监督，关键是始终坚持党的领导，坚持全国一盘棋，严格按照法定职权和法定程序进行监督，既敢于监督又善于监督，正确处理监督与支持的关系，促进“一府两院”依法行政、公正司法，形成加强和改进工作的合力。实行有效监督，关键是紧紧围绕党和国家工作大局，坚持问题导向，找准加强监督工作的着力点，完善监督工作方式方法，跟踪问效、一抓到底，推动解决人大代表、人民群众普遍关心的热点难点问题，让人民群众有更多获得感。	
Oversight by the NPC and its Standing Committee over the work of the State Council, the Supreme People's Court, and the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and over the enforcement of the Constitution and other laws, is both an inherent requirement and institutional design of the system of people's congresses and a practice that embodies the constitutional principle that all state power belongs to the people. The 12th NPC Standing Committee has effectively exercised the power of oversight granted to it by the Constitution and other laws and has adhered to the basic principle that oversight must be proper and effective. Throughout this process, we have developed a deeper understanding of the designed functions of oversight by people's congresses as well as the principles governing this work.

To exercise proper oversight, it is vital that we consistently uphold leadership by the Party and coordinate our oversight work nationwide. We must exercise oversight in strict accordance with our legally mandated powers and statutory procedures. We must have both the courage and the competence to carry out oversight and properly manage the relationship between oversight and support, so that we can truly help the State Council carry out administration in accordance with the law and help the Supreme People's Court and the Supreme People's Procuratorate administer justice impartially. This is a way for us to work together with them and help them strengthen and improve their work.

To deliver effective oversight, it is crucial that we keep to a problem-oriented approach and identify the focal points of our oversight work, while keeping in mind the overall work of the Party and the country. We should improve the way we carry out oversight, conducting follow-up oversight to get to the bottom of problems and see real results. This will allow us to work toward resolution of major and difficult issues of common concern to NPC deputies and the general public, and to ensure that the people gain a greater sense of benefit.

新的一年，常委会要牢固树立和贯彻落实新发展理念，坚持以人民为中心的发展思想，加强对有关法律实施情况的监督，加强对“一府两院”工作的监督，促进经济平稳健康发展和社会和谐稳定。一是加强对法律实施情况的监督，检查药品管理法、产品质量法、著作权法、固体废物污染环境防治法、种子法、网络安全法的实施情况。二是加大对预算决算的监督力度，听取审议2016年中央决算报告、审计工作报告、预算执行情况报告、审计查出问题整改情况报告；围绕非税收入规范管理等进行专题调研；研究建立国务院向全国人大常委会报告国有资产管理情况的制度；推进预算联网监督工作。三是围绕全面做好稳增长、促改革、调结构、惠民生、防风险各项工作，听取审议国务院关于计划执行情况、推进供给侧结构性改革加快制造业转型升级工作情况的报告；听取审议国务院关于脱贫攻坚、国家财政教育资金分配和使用、药品管理、文化遗产工作情况的报告；听取审议国务院关于2016年度环境状况和环境保护目标完成情况、草原生态环境保护工作情况的报告；围绕未成年人保护法实施、民族乡经济社会发展、华侨权益保护等进行专题调研。四是围绕促进司法公正，分别听取审议最高人民法院、最高人民检察院关于全面深化司法改革情况的报告。五是持续加强宪法实施监督工作，开展国家宪法日活动，依法组织宪法宣誓；加快建立全国统一的备案审查信息化平台，加强备案审查工作。	
This coming year, we will keep in mind and put into practice the new development philosophy and adhere to the vision of people-centered development. We will strengthen oversight over the implementation of laws and over the work of the State Council, the Supreme People's Court, and the Supreme People's Procuratorate, so that we can help ensure steady and sound economic development as well as social harmony and stability.

First, we will intensify oversight of the implementation of laws. We will inspect compliance with the Pharmaceutical Administration Law, the Product Quality Law, the Copyright Law, the Law on the Prevention and Control of Environmental Pollution Caused by Solid Wastes, the Seed Law, and the Cybersecurity Law.

Second, we will strengthen oversight of government budgets and final accounts. We will hear and deliberate the State Council's reports on the central government's final accounts for 2016, on auditing work, on budget implementation, and on the rectification of problems discovered in auditing. We will conduct research on topics such as standardizing non-tax revenue management, and explore ways to put in place a system through which the State Council reports to the NPC Standing Committee on the management of state-owned assets. We will press ahead with the integrated online oversight of budgets.

Third, with a focus on the government's comprehensive initiatives to ensure steady growth, advance reform, make structural adjustments, improve living standards, and guard against risks, we will hear and deliberate reports of the State Council on the implementation of the plan for national economic and social development and on the work to advance supply-side structural reform and accelerate transformation and upgrading of manufacturing. We will hear and deliberate reports of the State Council on poverty reduction progress, on allocation and utilization of government funds for education, on drug administration, and on protection of cultural heritage. We will hear and deliberate the State Council's reports on the state of the environment and the fulfillment of environmental protection targets in 2016, and on its work concerning grassland ecological conservation and environmental protection. We will conduct research on the implementation of the Law on the Protection of Minors, on economic and social development in townships where ethnic minorities live, and on protection of the rights and interests of overseas Chinese.

Fourth, with a view to promoting judicial impartiality, we will hear and deliberate reports of the Supreme People's Court and the Supreme People's Procuratorate on their work to comprehensively deepen judicial reform.

Fifth, we will make consistent efforts to strengthen oversight over enforcement of the Constitution. We will hold events to mark National Constitution Day and organize in accordance with the law swearing-in ceremonies for pledging allegiance to the Constitution. We will accelerate the building of a nationally unified information platform for recording and reviewing normative documents so as to improve our work in this regard.

三、认真做好人大代表选举工作	3. Ensure well-organized elections of deputies to people's congresses
选举人大代表是人民代表大会制度的基础，对于巩固党的执政地位、保障人民当家作主、加强国家政权建设具有重要意义。常委会要贯彻党中央关于人大代表换届选举工作的部署要求，依照宪法和选举法等法律规定，制定有关法律文件，主持十三届全国人大代表选举。指导、督促各选举单位做好代表选举工作，深刻汲取辽宁拉票贿选案的教训，严密防范措施，严明纪律规矩，确保换届工作正确方向，确保选举工作弊绝风清。组织好香港特别行政区、澳门特别行政区选举十三届全国人大代表。依法加强代表资格审查工作。发挥好全国县乡两级人大换届选举工作联席会议作用，继续做好指导县乡人大换届选举有关工作。	The election of deputies is the foundation of the system of people's congresses and is of great importance for consolidating the Party's position as the governing party, ensuring the position of the people as masters of the country, and strengthening state power. In line with the Party Central Committee's arrangements and requirements concerning the election of new deputies to people's congresses, we will formulate the necessary legal documents and organize the election of deputies to the 13th NPC, acting in accordance with the Constitution and other laws including the Electoral Law for the National People's Congress and Local People's Congresses. We will provide guidance to electoral bodies to help them organize elections well, study the lessons learned from the voting bribery case in Liaoning Province, and, through a combination of strict preventative measures and disciplinary regulations, ensure that the right direction is maintained in elections and the elections are conducted honestly. We will ensure that elections of deputies to the 13th NPC are properly organized in the Hong Kong and Macao special administrative regions. Review of deputies' qualifications will be strengthened in accordance with the law. We will see that the national joint conference on the election of new deputies to people's congresses at the county and township levels fully plays its role, and ensure elections at these two levels are well organized.
四、加强和改进代表工作	4. Strengthen and improve the NPC's deputy-related work
4年来，十二届全国人大代表肩负人民重托，代表人民利益和意志，依法执行代表职务，参加行使国家权力，为全国人大及其常委会各项工作奠定了坚实基础，为党和国家事业发展作出了重要贡献。我们要从保障人民当家作主的高度，坚持尊重代表主体地位，自觉接受代表和人民监督，确保人大及其常委会始终成为人民的代表机关。	During these past four years, the deputies to the 12th NPC, bearing in mind the great trust the people have placed in them, have performed their duties in accordance with the law and participated in the exercise of state power so as to represent the interests and will of the people. Their efforts have laid a solid foundation for the work of the NPC and its Standing Committee, and they have made great contributions to the development of the cause of the Party and the country. To ensure that the people serve as the masters of the country, we will continue to respect the principal position of deputies, consciously accept oversight from deputies and the public, and see to it that people's congresses and their standing committees always represent the people.
新的一年，要继续通过多种形式听取代表的意见建议，推动“一府两院”加强与代表的联系，拓宽代表知情知政渠道。做好代表列席常委会会议工作，组织代表参加常委会执法检查、专门委员会有关会议和学习培训活动等。贯彻落实关于完善人大代表联系人民群众制度的实施意见，密切人大代表同人民群众的联系，努力做到民有所呼、我有所应。切实加强代表思想政治作风建设，提高代表履职能力，加强代表履职监督，促进代表依法履职尽责。	This coming year, we will continue to listen to deputies' comments and suggestions using a variety of channels, urge the State Council, the Supreme People's Court, and the Supreme People's Procuratorate to strengthen their communication with deputies, and broaden channels through which deputies can learn about state affairs and the government's work. We will invite deputies to observe meetings of the Standing Committee, and arrange for them to participate in the Standing Committee's law compliance inspections and attend relevant meetings and study and training activities of special committees. We will implement the guidelines on improving the system by which deputies to people's congresses keep in contact with the people, so as to ensure deputies better communicate with the people and respond to each and every one of the people's concerns. We will help deputies improve their political stand, thinking, and work style and ensure they are better able to carry out their duties, and we will strengthen oversight of deputies to see that they carry out their duties and functions in accordance with the law.
五、统筹做好其他方面工作	5. Ensure success in all other aspects of the NPC's work
积极开展对外交往。贯彻落实党中央外交大政方针和总体部署，巩固和深化与有关国家议会的机制交流，做好周边国家和“一带一路”沿线国家议会工作，积极参与议会多边外交，发挥高层交往和各层次友好往来作用，巩固政治互信，加强务实合作，增进人民友好，为我国发展积极营造良好外部环境。	
We will actively carry out foreign relations work.

In accordance with the Party Central Committee's major policies and overall plan for China's diplomatic work, we will consolidate and deepen mechanism-based exchanges with relevant foreign parliaments, especially those of neighboring countries and countries participating in the Belt and Road Initiative. We will actively take part in multilateral parliamentary diplomatic activities and make use of both top-level exchanges and friendly exchanges at other levels to enhance political trust and pragmatic cooperation with other countries and deepen friendship with other peoples, thus helping create a favorable external environment for China's development.

加强人大新闻舆论和理论研究工作。牢牢掌握意识形态工作主动权，学习、宣传、阐释以习近平同志为核心的党中央关于坚持和完善人民代表大会制度、全面依法治国的理论和实践创新成果，生动展现社会主义民主法治建设新气象新局面。坚持正确舆论导向，加强人大新闻发布工作和舆论阵地建设。开展香港特别行政区基本法实施20周年纪念活动。	
We will improve the NPC's information and public communication work and theoretical research.

To maintain the initiative in work concerning the public discourse, we will work to understand, explain, and communicate the new theoretical and practical accomplishments that the Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core has made in upholding and improving the system of people's congresses and in fully advancing the law-based governance of China, and we will demonstrate clearly the achievements and progress China has made in developing socialist democracy and the rule of law. To maintain the right tone in public communication, we will improve the NPC's press release work and enhance its public communication capacity. We will hold events to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the implementation of the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.

继续推动地方人大工作完善发展。加强县乡人大工作和建设，举办县级人大常委会负责同志学习班，加强对地方人大立法工作的指导。	
We will continue to promote the development and improvement of the work of local people's congresses.

We will take steps to strengthen the work and development of people's congresses at the county and township levels, organize study sessions for leading members of the standing committees of county-level people's congresses, and offer better guidance on legislative work to local people's congresses.

贯彻党中央关于健全人大讨论决定重大事项制度、各级政府重大决策出台前向本级人大报告的部署要求，认真做好人大讨论决定重大事项工作，更好发挥国家权力机关职能作用。	In accordance with the Party Central Committee's requirement that the system by which people's congresses discuss and decide major issues be improved and that people's governments at all levels report to people's congresses at the same level before publishing major policy decisions, we will make sure that people's congresses properly perform their tasks in discussing and deciding major issues and better carry out their functions as organs of state power.
全面加强常委会自身建设。加强思想政治教育和理论武装，旗帜鲜明讲政治，进一步增强政治意识、大局意识、核心意识、看齐意识，坚定维护以习近平同志为核心的党中央权威和集中统一领导。贯彻落实深化全面从严治党精神，严守政治纪律和政治规矩，营造风清气正的政治生态。全面加强全国人大机关建设，用好巡视整改工作成果，打造忠诚干净担当的机关干部队伍，切实提高参谋助手能力和服务保障水平。	
We will strengthen self-improvement of the Standing Committee in all respects.

We will improve our thinking and theoretical competence; take a clear stand in emphasizing politics; raise our awareness of the need to maintain political integrity, think in big-picture terms, uphold the leadership core, and keep in alignment; and safeguard the authority of the Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core and uphold its centralized, unified leadership. We will deepen our understanding of the guiding principles of the Party's strict self-governance so as to ensure better implementation of them, strictly observe political discipline and rules, and create an honest and upright political environment. We will comprehensively improve the administrative bodies of the Standing Committee and special committees. Utilizing the lessons learned from addressing the problems discovered by the central discipline inspection team during its special inspection of these bodies, we will help these bodies better assist and support deputies and ensure their officials are loyal to the Party, honest, and responsible.

各位代表！我们比历史上任何时期都更接近中华民族伟大复兴的目标，比历史上任何时期都更有信心、有能力实现这个目标。让我们更加紧密地团结在以习近平同志为核心的党中央周围，不忘初心、继续前进，开拓创新、奋发有为，为长期坚持、全面贯彻、不断发展人民代表大会制度，为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而努力奋斗！	
Fellow Deputies,

Today, we are closer than ever in history to realizing the rejuvenation of the Chinese nation, and we have greater confidence in achieving this goal and greater capability to do so than ever before. Rallying even closer around the Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core, let us stay true to the Party's founding mission and continue to move forward as we work with creativity and tap into our potential to uphold, implement, and develop the system of people's congresses, achieve the Two Centenary Goals,(1) and realize the Chinese Dream of national rejuvenation.

Note(1) This refers to completing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects by the time the Communist Party of China celebrates its centenary in 2021 and turning the People's Republic of China into a modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced, and harmonious by the time it celebrates its centenary in 2049.
